<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Irish Ecclesiastical Record, Volume 1, July 1865</title>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 10, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">39098</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-03-10">March 10, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
            Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Irish Ecclesiastical Record</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Volume 1</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">July 1865</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Judge Keogh And Catholic Doctrines.</head>

<p>
We have read the address of Mr. Justice Keogh<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Milton's Prose: A Lecture delivered in the Museum of Irish Industry, St.
Stephen's Green, by the Right Hon. Judge Keogh</hi>: The Irish Times, June 1, 1865.</note> with feelings
of surprise and sorrow. It is un-Catholic in its language, it is un-Catholic
in its spirit, it is un-Catholic in its principles. If it had
come from a member of a hostile sect, we could well afford to let
it pass unnoticed; to let it live its short life, and die a natural
death. But when the calumnies, the sneers, the sarcasms of
our enemies are turned against us by one who is enrolled
under the banner of Catholic faith, we can no longer remain
silent in safety. The weapons which are powerless in the hands
of a declared enemy, are dangerous indeed when they are wielded
by a traitor in the camp.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Justice Keogh is no ordinary man. His mind is adorned
with talents well fitted to amuse, to delight, to instruct an audience.
In his short but brilliant career as an orator and a
statesman, he won for himself a great name at the bar and in the
senate. And now he is lifted up above his fellows, and placed
in a position of high trust and extensive influence. When such
a man comes forward, with forethought and preparation, as one
of the instructors of the age, he is a conspicuous object of interest
and attraction. He is looked upon, by those who are not acquainted
with his antecedents, as the exponent of Catholic views,
the representative of Catholic intelligence and education. We
are therefore compelled, in self-defence, to declare that the
opinions he has expressed are not the opinions of the Catholic
Church, and the language he has thought fit to use cannot be
regarded, by the Catholic people of Ireland, but as offensive and
insulting.
</p>

<p>
His lecture contains little originality of thought or novelty of
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
argument. It does but reflect the spirit of the age in which we
live. The opinions and the views which it sets forth have long
been familiar to our ears: they pervade the shallow current literature
of England, of Germany, of Italy, of France. Intellectual
freedom, unbounded, unrestrained; freedom of thought in the
search after truth, without any regard to authority; freedom of
speech in the circulation of every view and opinion; freedom
to pull down old theories, freedom to build up new theories;
freedom to roam at large without any guide over the vast fields
of speculation, adopting that which private judgment commends,
rejecting that which human reason disapproves; these are the
popular dogmas of the present day; and these are the topics
which Mr. Justice Keogh proposes to illustrate and to enforce
by the life and writings of our great English poet.
</p>

<p>
Now, we are not the enemies of freedom. The Catholic
Church is not the enemy of freedom. But we should expect
that one who comes forward to enlighten the world on this important
subject, would tell us <emph>how far</emph> human reason is to be left
without restraint in the search after truth. It is easy to talk of
intolerance, persecution, narrow-minded bigotry; but these words
have no meaning unless we first clearly understand what that
freedom is&mdash;in thought, in word, in action&mdash;which is the natural
right of all men; which it is intolerance to deny, which it is
tyranny to extinguish. First of all, if the fact of a Divine Revelation
be once admitted, it is clear that human reason is not exempt
from <emph>all restraint</emph>: it must be controlled at least by the
Word of God. We are surely bound to believe what God has
taught: and when reason would lead us to conclusions contrary
to His teaching, as may sometimes happen, we are bound to check
our reason and to abandon those conclusions. For, reason <emph>may</emph>
be deceived, but God can <emph>not</emph>. This is what we understand by
the words of St. Paul when he speaks of <q>bringing into captivity
every understanding unto the obedience of Christ</q>&mdash;II. <hi rend='italic'>Cor.</hi>, x. 5.
</p>

<p>
With this preliminary remark we shall now submit to our
readers the opinions of Mr. Justice Keogh:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Could words of mine prevail to induce you to devote a small portion
of your leisure hours, stolen though it be from the pleasure
paths of sensational or periodical literature, to those great productions
of John Milton, in which the staunchest friend of freedom and
of truth that ever lived has made the most successful war against
tyranny and falsehood&mdash;in which he has proclaimed in tones not
unworthy of the Apostle of the Gentiles,<note place='foot'>We print the words of the judge as we find them, though it seems irreverential,
not to say worse, to compare a regicide, and a man who denied the divinity of
Christ, to the apostle of the nations. Though Milton was gifted with the highest
natural powers, yet, not having the qualities of a true Christian, he was only like
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.</note> that education really free
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
is the only source of political and individual liberty, the only true
safeguard of states and bulwark of their renown&mdash;in which he has for
ever <q>justified the ways of God to man</q>, by asserting the right of all
men to exercise unrestrained their intellectual faculties upon all the
gifts of God&mdash;to determine for themselves what is truth and what is
falsehood&mdash;to circulate their thoughts from one to another, from land
to land, from tribe to tribe, from nation to nation, free as <q>the winds
that from four quarters blow</q>&mdash;to raise their thoughts and to pour
forth their words above the level of vulgar superstition, unrestricted
by any illiberal or illiterate licenser&mdash;then you will find that he has
risen, as mortal man never did before, to the height of greatest argument,
and proclaimed in language which is affecting the fate of
millions, even at this hour, on the banks of the Mississippi, and in
the remote forests of the far west, that He who has made 'of one
blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the earth,
willeth not that men shall any longer hold in bondage as a property
the bodies or the souls of men, but that all alike shall have, unobstructed
by any ordinance, a free book, a free press, a free conscience'.
If any words of mine shall tempt you to approach these considerations,
to ponder upon them as they are to be found in the tractates
of Milton, in a tranquil, in a large and comprehensive spirit, and
when you have done so, to make their fit application not only at home
but abroad, not only abroad but at home, then we shall not have met
in vain in this assembly</q>.
</quote>

<p>
We do not propose to offer any remarks on the subject of
political liberty. But the principles here enunciated are of universal
application. Milton waged the <q>successful war</q> of freedom
not less in matters of religion than in matters of state. And
Mr. Justice Keogh adopts his principles without any limitation.
He asserts with Milton <q>the right of all men to exercise <emph>unrestrained
their intellectual faculties upon all the gifts of God</emph>&mdash;to
determine for themselves what is truth and what is falsehood</q>.
If we take these words literally as they stand, they are inconsistent
not with the Catholic religion only, but with every system
of Christianity that has ever existed. Luther, the great champion
of intellectual freedom, though he shook off the yoke of
church authority, set up in its stead the authority of the Bible.
Even he was willing to admit that the wanderings of the human
mind should be restricted by the teaching of the Word of God.
It is clearly contrary to the common principles of Christianity
to assert that in metaphysics, in ethics, in psychology, in any
human science, the mind is at liberty to embrace opinions incompatible
with the truths which God has revealed. And if it
be not at liberty to do so, then it is not <q>unrestrained</q>.
</p>

<p>
It may be said, however, that the author of this address does
not really intend to assert what his words seem to convey.
How then are we to guess at his meaning? He insists upon
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>
<q>the right of all men to exercise <emph>unrestrained</emph> their intellectual
faculties</q> in the pursuit of truth. If he does not mean this, what
<emph>does</emph> he mean? If he does not wish to exclude <emph>all restraint</emph> on
the <q>intellectual faculties</q> of men, what restraint is he willing
to admit? Upon this point there seem to be just two opinions
between which he has to choose: the one is the common doctrine
of all Catholics; the other is the fundamental principle of the
Protestant Church. Let us pause for a moment to examine these
two systems.
</p>

<p>
According to Catholic faith, our Divine Lord has established
in His Church an infallible tribunal, to pronounce, in matters of
religion, what is true and what is false. Hence, it is never lawful,
whether there be question of religious belief or of human
science, to adopt opinions at variance with the teaching of this
infallible tribunal. Here indeed is a check upon intellectual
freedom, but a check which must, of necessity, be admitted by
all who belong to the Catholic Church. And surely it is no
great sacrifice to submit our finite understanding, so frail and
erring, to the authority of God's Word, explained by a tribunal
which He has Himself established, and to which He has promised
His never-failing help.
</p>

<p>
Protestants, on the other hand, maintain the right of each one
to interpret for himself, according to the best of his private
judgment, the Revelation which God has given to man. The
liberty of the human mind is therefore unfettered by any human
authority. In this all sects are agreed. Some, indeed, believe
that the Church has authority to teach, and some reject this
opinion; but all maintain that there is no obligation in conscience
to accept her teaching. She has not the gift of infallibility.
Just as individuals may fall into error, so too may
the Church herself fall into error. Her teaching may be true, or
it may be false; each one is to judge for himself. The only
check upon the freedom of thought is the Divine Message sent
to us from on High, and recorded in the pages of Holy Writ.
</p>

<p>
We maintain, of course, that the Catholic system which we
have just explained is true, and the Protestant system false. If we
were engaged in controversy with a Protestant, it would be our
duty at once to establish and to defend our doctrine; to demonstrate
that the Church of Christ is infallible, and that the right of
private judgment is contrary alike to the teaching of Scripture
and to the dictates of common sense. But in the case before us,
there is no call for proof: Mr. Justice Keogh is a Catholic. It
remains then only to examine if the language of his address is
not calculated to convey an opinion quite inconsistent with the
faith which he professes.
</p>

<p>
The question we wish to raise is simply this: <q>Does the address
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
before us admit that the human mind in the pursuit of
truth should be restrained by the authoritative definitions of the
Catholic Church, or does it rather exclude this restraint?</q> Now,
in the first place, it is to be remembered that this restriction of
intellectual freedom is denied by all Protestants in this country,
and maintained by all Catholics. When a lecturer, then, addressing
a mixed audience, in a written discourse, tells them
that <q>all men have a right to exercise their intellectual faculties
<emph>unrestrained</emph></q>, do not the circumstances of the case fix upon
his words a Protestant signification? Will not his hearers
naturally say that he has chosen the Protestant side of the controversy,
and not the Catholic? Again, according to the Protestant
doctrine, each one is at liberty to construct a system of
religious belief for himself: according to the Catholic doctrine,
every one should accept the tenets of his faith on the authority
of the Church. Now we are told in the address, that all men
have <q><emph>a right to determine for themselves</emph> what is truth and what
is falsehood</q>. Has this phraseology a Catholic or a Protestant
complexion? Lastly, the lecturer exhorts his hearers to go
themselves to the pages of Milton, there to learn the doctrine of
intellectual freedom. It will, therefore, naturally be supposed,
that the doctrine is defended by the lecturer in the same sense
in which it is defended by the poet. Now Milton denied again
and again, not in his writings only, but also by his acts, that the
Church has any right to interfere with the speculations of the
human mind. It is evident, therefore, that the language of
Mr. Justice Keogh, whether considered in itself, or understood
by the light of the context, is incompatible with the principles
of the Catholic Religion.
</p>

<p>
Freedom of thought is not enough: freedom of speech is also
an essential dogma of the new philosophy. We are assured that
all men have a right <q>to circulate their thoughts from one to
another, from land to land, from tribe to tribe, from nation to
nation, free as <q>the winds that from four quarters blow</q>; to
raise their thoughts, and to pour forth their words above the level
of vulgar superstition, unrestricted by any illiberal or illiterate
licenser</q>. Accordingly, amongst the various prose works of
Milton, there is one which our lecturer selects for especial commendation.
It is entitled: <hi rend='italic'>Areopagitica, a Speech for the Liberty
of Unlicensed Printing</hi>. This little tract is distinguished, no doubt,
for its learning, wit, and eloquence; but these high qualities are
devoted to the defence of opinions which we cannot accept.
The book and its principles are thus introduced to his audience
by Mr. Justice Keogh:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>If all the works he produced were cancelled and forgotten ...
yet give one in hand, the treatise for the liberty of unlicensed printing,
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
the <hi rend='italic'>Areopagitica</hi>, and I would boldly maintain, not only that
he had satisfied every call which his country could make on the most
devoted of her sons, but that he had vindicated their rights and sustained
his own reputation in the greatest pen writing in the English
language. He wished, as he tells us in this treatise, to deliver
the press from the restraints with which it was incumbered, that
the power of determining what ought to be published and what
suppressed, might no longer be entrusted to captious lawyers or
knavish priests, or even grave chancellors and venerable chief justices....
I shall give you, even at the risk of trying your patience,
some extracts from this treatise; but first let me tell you, that it
establishes in the clearest way, not only that Milton was the fast friend
of toleration, but that the charges of being an enemy of all order
and of all monarchy, so industriously made against him, are without
foundation.... And then he gives expression to this noble sentiment,
fit to be engraven in letters of gold. Let statesmen hear it,
and tyrants, civil and ecclesiastical, dwell upon it: <q>Although I dispraise
not the defence of just immunities, yet love my peace better,
if that were all, give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue
freely, according to conscience, above all liberties</q>. I cannot bring
myself to hurry over this noble tract. I have read it over again and
again; I read it years and years ago, and often since, and now again,
for the purpose of addressing you; and the oftener I read it, the more
I take it to my heart. If such be its effect upon me, as I fondly hope
it may be upon many of you</q>, etc.
</quote>

<p>
Notwithstanding this ardent and enthusiastic declaration, we
yet think it would be unfair to impute to the learned lecturer
every casual expression or even every deliberate opinion set forth
in the speech he so much admires. It is, however, clear that
he adopts as his own at least the main features of the doctrine
enunciated, and the general character of the argument by which
it is defended. This doctrine may be explained in two words:
unbounded liberty, on the one hand, to publish and to circulate
all manner of opinions; unbounded liberty, on the other, to read
all manner of books. The State, it is contended, has no right to
forbid, or to repress, those publications which are dangerous to
the welfare of society; neither has the Church a right to forbid
or to repress those publications which are hostile to the spiritual
interests of the faithful. These views we believe to be false and
pernicious both as regards the power of the State and the power
of the Church. It is, however, under the latter aspect alone
that we propose to consider the subject.
</p>

<p>
The pastors of the Church have received a divine command to
guard the integrity of faith and to watch over the purity of
morals. Therefore have they also received from God that authority
which is necessary for the due fulfilment of this high
charge. And such is the authority to prohibit and, as far as
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
may be, to repress those publications of which the only tendency
is to introduce error and to disseminate vice. For it is impossible
to preserve truth incorrupt in a community, if error may
be circulated without restriction, dressed up in the delusive garb
of sophistry; it is impossible to preserve morals pure, if vice
may be freely exhibited in the most seductive and alluring
forms. A great writer and a wise philosopher, Samuel Johnson,
even though a Protestant, had the vigour of mind to seize
this important principle, which he has expressed with a singular
felicity of diction and an epigrammatic power peculiarly his
own: <q>If every murmurer at government</q>, he says, <q>may diffuse
discontent, there can be no peace; and if every sceptic in
theology may teach his follies, there can be no religion</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Works of Samuel Johnson</hi>: Dublin, 1793, vol. v., p. 72.</note>
</p>

<p>
We confess indeed that this is a question full of difficulty to
members of the Protestant Church. They believe that each one
has a right to judge for himself what is true and what is false: and
it is not easy to see how this right can be exercised, unless each
one be free to examine every form of belief, every variety of
error. But we are at a loss to understand how a Catholic should
go astray on a subject so plain. From the earliest ages the
Catholic Church has ever claimed and exercised the right to
condemn and prohibit those books which are contrary to faith
and dangerous to morals. Now it would be an error in doctrine
to suppose that the Catholic Church could claim such a right
if she had not received it from her Divine Founder.
</p>

<p>
If we pass from the doctrine of Milton to his arguments, we
shall have much greater reason to wonder how it should have
come to pass that we are asked, by a Catholic lecturer, to accept
his views. He does not defend the circulation of bad books as
a necessary evil, which it is inexpedient or impossible to check.
On the contrary, he maintains it is a positive good, which ought
to be encouraged. According to his notion, the promiscuous
reading of bad books is the furnace in which our love for truth
and virtue is to be tried. There can be no merit in truth, he
argues, for him who is not acquainted with error; there can be
no merit in virtue for him who is not familiar with vice. These
are sentiments so utterly repugnant to the common instincts of
our nature, that we could not believe they came from our illustrious
poet, if his own words did not bear witness against him:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>As, therefore, the state of man now is, what wisdom can there
he to choose, what continence to forbear, without the knowledge of
evil? He that can apprehend and consider vice with all her baits
and seeming pleasures, and yet abstain, and yet distinguish, and yet
prefer that which is truly better, he is the true wayfaring Christian.
I cannot praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue, unexercised and unbreathed,
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
that never sallies out and seeks her adversary, but slinks
out of the race, where that immortal garland is to be run for notwithstanding
dust and heat. Assuredly we bring not innocence into
the world; we bring impurity much rather: that which purifies us
is trial, and trial is by what is contrary. That virtue, therefore, which
is but a youngling in the contemplation of evil, and knows not the
utmost that vice promises to her followers, and rejects it, is but a
blank virtue, not a pure.... Since therefore the knowledge
and survey of vice is in this world so necessary to the constituting
of human virtue, and the scanning of error to the confirmation of
truth, how can we more safely and with less danger scout into the
regions of sin and falsity, than by reading all manner of tractates, and
hearing all manner of reason? And this is the benefit which may
be had of books promiscuously read</q>.<note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>Works of John Milton</hi>. London: Bickers and Bush, 1863: vol. iv. pp.
411, 412.</note>
</quote>

<p>
We shall offer no commentary on this passage. Principles
like these carry with them their own condemnation. And yet
such are the principles advanced in a tract, which has made so
favourable an impression on Mr. Justice Keogh, that the <emph>oftener
he reads it, the more he takes it to his heart</emph>, and which he <emph>fondly
hopes</emph> may make a like impression on the minds of his audience.
</p>

<p>
When we are assured by Mr. Justice Keogh that Milton was
<q>the fast friend of toleration</q>, we can scarcely believe that he
is serious. Lest, however, our readers should be led astray, we
shall briefly tell them what Milton <emph>really thought</emph> and <emph>said</emph> on
the subject of religious toleration. Towards the close of his life,
he wrote a very important treatise<note place='foot'>It is entitled <hi rend='italic'>A Treatise of True Religion, Heresy, Schism, Toleration, and
the best means to prevent the growth of Popery</hi>.</note> in which he discusses the
question, and explains his views with his usual clearness and
force. He maintains in this treatise that all religious sects
are to be tolerated, with <emph>one exception</emph>; and that exception is
the <emph>Roman Catholic Church</emph>. Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists,
Socinians, Arminians, in a word, <emph>all Protestants</emph>, whatever their
religious opinions may be, should have liberty to preach, to
discuss, to worship, unmolested: but Catholics must not be tolerated;
they must not be permitted to defend their doctrines; they
must not be permitted to worship either in public or in private.<note place='foot'><q>As for tolerating the exercise of their [the Catholic] religion, I answer, that
toleration is either public or private; and the exercise of their religion, as far
as it is idolatrous, can be tolerated neither way; <emph>not publicly</emph>, without grievous
and insufferable scandal given to all conscientious beholders; <emph>not privately</emph>, without
great offence to God, declared against all kind of idolatry, though secret</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Milton's
Works</hi>, already quoted, vol. v. p. 413.</note>
This, he contends, is one of the <emph>best means to prevent the growth
of Popery</emph>.<note place='foot'>See Bayle; <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire Historique et Critique</hi>: art. Milton, note o; also
<hi rend='italic'>Johnson's Works</hi>, vol. v. pp. 95, 96.</note> Here is the champion of intellectual liberty that Mr.
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
Justice Keogh would hold up to the admiration of his audience!
Here is <q>the fast friend of toleration</q>, <q>the staunchest friend of
freedom and truth that ever lived</q>, the man who <q>has made the
most successful war against tyranny and falsehood</q>! We must
charitably suppose that the learned lecturer has formed his
opinion of Milton without reading his works.
</p>

<p>
We are told by the biographers of Milton that his father, who
was the son of a zealous Roman Catholic, abandoned the religion
of his ancestors, and was on that account deprived of his inheritance.
The act of apostasy is one that the Catholic Church can
never contemplate without the deepest sorrow and abhorrence.
According to the principles of our faith, he who separates himself
from the one True Church transgresses the command of God and
forfeits his claim to everlasting happiness. Yet, it would seem,
Mr. Justice Keogh finds in this act nothing to deplore, but much
to admire. Speaking of the poet, he says:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>He was in early youth instructed by a father who had sacrificed
for conscience' sake a fair inheritance, with all scriptural lore, of which
he drank with a thirst which was never satisfied</q>.
</quote>

<p>
If we understand these words aright, our author regards with
complacency the conduct of one who renounced the true faith, to
embrace a religion which, in the eyes of all Catholics, is false and
heretical. To his mind the act of apostasy is <emph>a sacrifice for conscience'
sake</emph>. This is liberality of sentiment indeed! But it is
a liberality of sentiment which we cannot reconcile with the
maxims of sacred Scripture. Not so did the great apostle speak
of those who had <q>made shipwreck concerning the faith</q>. <q>Of
whom</q>, he said, <q>is Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have
delivered up to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme</q>&mdash;I.
<hi rend='italic'>Tim.</hi>, i. 19. 20. And again: <q>And their speech spreadeth like
a canker; of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus, who have erred
from the truth, saying that the resurrection is past already</q>&mdash;II.
<hi rend='italic'>Tim.</hi>, ii. 17, 18.
</p>

<p>
Our readers, perhaps, will not be unwilling to know what was
the effect of this training on the religious principles of Milton.
His rich and vigorous mind was, indeed, a fertile soil. The seed
which was sown in the spring time of youth, did not fail to grow
up into a luxuriant tree, and to bring forth fruit in due season,
according to its kind. In the maturity of life he constructed a
system of theology which he professed to derive from Scripture
alone. It is recorded by his own pen in his treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Doctrina
Christiana</hi>, which, having been lost for a hundred and fifty years,
has come to light within the present century. The peculiar
tenets which he sets forth in this remarkable book may be briefly
told. He defends the lawfulness of polygamy and divorce; he
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
maintains that matter exists from eternity; he denies the doctrine
of the Trinity; the Son is inferior to the Father, and produced
in time; the Holy Ghost is inferior to the Father and the Son.
An able writer has described <q>the result of the whole work</q> as
<q>a system of theology not merely in discordance with the Church
of England, but with every sect by which we are divided; an
incoherent and conflicting theory, which combines Arianism,
Anabaptism, Latitudinarianism, Quakerism, and we know not
what to add, on account of his opinions on polygamy, but
Mahometanism</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Quarterly Review</hi>, October, 1825, p. 446.</note> These results are the ripe fruit of that early
instruction in <q>all Scriptural lore</q> which Milton received, and for
which Mr. Justice Keogh would seek our sympathy and approval.
</p>

<p>
After what we have seen, we cannot be surprised that our
learned lecturer should point the finger of scorn and ridicule at
the Roman Inquisition. Speaking of Milton's travels in Italy, he
says: <q>There it was his fortune to visit Gallileo, confined in the
prison of the Inquisition for thinking in astronomy otherwise than
the Franciscan and Dominican believers</q>. We do not propose
here to defend the Inquisition: neither shall we attempt to disprove
the charge, which Mr. Justice Keogh would fain convey,
that the Catholic Church is the enemy of scientific truth. We
shall wait for an adversary who deals in arguments and not in
sneers. We cannot, however, forbear to notice a gross inaccuracy
in the statement of fact. It is asserted that it was the fortune
of Milton <q>to visit Gallileo <emph>confined in the prison of the
Inquisition</emph></q>. This assertion is simply false. Milton's visit must
have occurred about the year 1638, and it is well known to all
who are acquainted with the subject, that Gallileo was then living
at home in his own house at Arcetri, quietly pursuing his astronomical
studies. In point of law, indeed, he was still technically a
prisoner of the Inquisition, but this is widely different from being
<emph>confined in the prison of the Inquisition</emph>. It is only fair to observe
that the words of Milton himself, from whom the lecturer has
taken his statement, are, on this point, strictly correct. <q>There
it was that I found and visited the famous Gallileo, grown old, <emph>a
prisoner to the Inquisition</emph>, for thinking in astronomy otherwise
than the Franciscan and Dominican licensers thought</q>.<note place='foot'>Milton's Works, Bickers and Bush; vol. iv. p. 428.</note> Our lecturer,
therefore, in borrowing the language of the poet, has not only
contrived to introduce an error, but he has taken care that this error
shall be on the side most unfavourable to the Catholic Church.
</p>

<p>
We shall not trouble the reader with our own views or arguments
on the hackneyed controversy of Gallileo's persecution.
We shall be content to contrast the opinion of Mr. Justice Keogh
with that of a learned and able Protestant writer, who has devoted
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
much study to the life and times of the great astronomer, and
who is himself honourably distinguished in kindred fields of
science. Sir David Brewster, with all his strong anti-Catholic
prejudices, distinctly maintains that the trials of Gallileo, such
as they were, are not to be ascribed to his opinions in matters of
astronomy, but rather to his <q>personal imprudence</q> and to his
<q>irreligious sentiments</q>.<note place='foot'>See the <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh Encyclopædia</hi>, articles <q>Copernicus</q>, and <q>Gallileo</q>.</note> The character of the persecution
which he had to endure at the hands of the Catholic Church may
be gathered from the testimony of the same eminent writer. In
the year 1623, long after he had been tried before the tribunal
of the Inquisition, having occasion to come to Rome, he met with
a noble and generous reception from the Father of the faithful.
<q>The kindness of his Holiness</q>, says Sir David Brewster, <q>was
of the most marked description. He not only loaded Gallileo
with presents, and promised him a pension for his son Vincenzo,
but wrote a letter to Ferdinand II., who had just succeeded
Cosmo as Grand Duke of Tuscany, recommending Gallileo to
his particular patronage</q>.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Martyrs of Science</hi>, by Sir David Brewster; or the <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh Review</hi>,
July, 1844, p. 173.</note> And again he says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Thus honoured by the head of the Church, and befriended by its
dignitaries, Gallileo must have felt himself secure against the indignities
of its lesser functionaries.... But Gallileo was bound to
the Romish hierarchy by even stronger ties. His son and himself
were pensioners of the Church; and having accepted of its alms, they
owed it at least a decent and respectful allegiance. The pension thus
given by Urban was not a remuneration which sovereigns sometimes
award to the services of their subjects. Gallileo was a foreigner at
Rome. The sovereign of the Papal state owed him no obligation;
and hence we must regard the pension of Gallileo as <emph>a donation from the
Roman Pontiff to science itself</emph>, and as a declaration to the Christian
world that <emph>religion was not jealous of philosophy</emph>, and that the Church of
Rome was willing to <emph>respect and foster even the genius of its enemies</emph></q>.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Martyrs of Science</hi>; or the <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh Review</hi>, July, 1844, p. 174.</note>
</quote>

<p>
There are many other blots in the address of Mr. Justice
Keogh, which a severe critic would not pass by without censure.
He would ask, perhaps, how comes it that the lecturer takes his
Scriptural quotations from the Protestant and not from the Catholic
Bible? Is it that the Protestant Bible is the only one with
which he is familiar? Can it be that the Protestant Bible is the
source from which he derives his views in philosophy and in
theology? We fully recognize the literary merits of the English
Authorized Version; but there can be no doubt that the religious
prejudices of its authors have led them into many serious errors.
At all events it is not usual for a Catholic to quote from its pages
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
without some apology or some explanation. Again, why does
he tell his audience that the names of Spenser, of Shakespeare,
of Scott, are to be found on the <hi rend='italic'>Index Expurgatorius</hi>? Did he
consult the <hi rend='italic'>Index</hi> himself and find these names upon it? It
cannot be: they are not there. Was he induced to make the
assertion on the authority of some trustworthy witness? We can
scarcely believe it was so: no writer who cares for his reputation
would commit himself to a statement so easily disproved. Was
it, then, that he wished to cast unfounded aspersions on the
Catholic Church, and to bring her institutions into discredit
with all who cherish the names of those illustrious writers?
Once more: Mr. Justice Keogh, forgetting, for the moment, his
country as well as his religion, introduces to the favourable notice
of his audience <q>our glorious deliverer, William III.</q>! What a
startling phrase to hear from the lips of an Irishman and a
Catholic! William III. possessed many eminent qualities: he
was a brave soldier and an able statesmen. But in the annals of
Ireland his name must be for ever associated with persecution
and with perfidy.<note place='foot'><p>It is singular that the sufferings of Irish Catholics should meet with more sympathy
from an English Protestant clergyman than from an Irish Catholic lecturer.
The relations between our country and <q>our glorious deliverer</q> are thus described
by the Rev. Sidney Smith:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>The war carried on in Ireland against King William cannot deserve the name
of a rebellion: it was a struggle for their lawful prince, whom they had sworn to
maintain, and whose zeal for the Catholic religion, whatever effect it might have
produced in England, could not by them be considered as a crime. This war was
terminated by the surrender of Limerick, upon conditions by which the Catholics
hoped, and very rationally hoped, to secure to themselves the free enjoyment of
their religion in future, and an exemption from all those civil penalties and incapacities
which the reigning creed is so fond of heaping upon its subjugated rivals.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>By the various articles of this treaty, they are to enjoy such privileges in the
exercise of their religion as they did enjoy in the time of Charles II.; and the
king promises, upon the meeting of parliament, <q>to endeavour to procure for them
such <emph>further security</emph> in that particular as may preserve them <emph>from any disturbance</emph>
on account of their said religion</q>. They are to be restored to their estates, privileges,
and immunities, as they enjoyed them in the time of Charles II. The
gentlemen are to be allowed to carry arms; and no other oath is to be tendered to
the Catholics who submit to King William than the oath of allegiance. These and
other articles <emph>King William ratifies for himself, his heirs and successors, as far as
in him lies, and confirms the same, and every other clause and matter therein
contained</emph>.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>These articles were signed by the English general on the 3rd of October, 1691;
and diffused comfort, confidence, and tranquillity among the Catholics. On the
22nd of October, the English parliament excluded Catholics from the Irish Houses of
Lords and Commons, by compelling them to take the oaths of supremacy before
admission.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>In 1695, the Catholics <emph>were deprived of all means of educating their children, at
home or abroad</emph>, and of the privilege of being guardians to their own or to other
persons' children. Then all the Catholics were disarmed, and then <emph>all the priests
banished. After this</emph> (probably by way of joke) an act was passed to <emph>confirm</emph> the
Treaty of Limerick,&mdash;the great and glorious King William totally forgetting the
contract he had entered into, of recommending the religious liberties of Catholics
to the attention of Parliament</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Works of the Reverend Sidney Smith.</hi>
London: Longman and Co., 1854, pp. 272, 273.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>

<p>
Our limited space is now drawing to a close; and, in good
truth, we are weary of passing censure. It is time that we lift
up our eyes from the right honourable lecturer to fix them for a
few moments on the more noble and majestic proportions of the
great poet himself. When we contemplate that venerable figure,
as it stands forth to view on the canvas of history, if we speak
in the language of censure, it must be blended with the language
of genuine love and veneration. His errors we cannot defend;
his faults we do not wish to extenuate; we are obliged to protest
against his principles, and those who eulogise them. But
amidst the varied fortunes of his chequered career he displayed
many great qualities, which cannot fail to win the admiration
of every generous heart.
</p>

<p>
Of his public conduct as a statesman we cannot indeed speak
with approval. It seems to us that all the arguments advanced
in his defence carry with them also his condemnation. He sided
with the parliament against the king, because, it is said, he
wished to uphold the constitution of his country; and yet he
defended the trial and execution of the king, which were conducted
in defiance of that same constitution. He abandoned his
lawful sovereign to support the fortunes of Cromwell, because
he believed that Charles was a despot; and yet he clung to the
cause of Cromwell when Cromwell was not only a despot but
an usurper. If the constitution was to be upheld, then the execution
of the king was indefensible. If a tyrant should forfeit
the allegiance of his subjects, then Cromwell had no claim to be
obeyed. Yet however much he erred, it must be ever borne in
mind that those who took a part in the turbulent events of the
great rebellion, had not the same opportunities to form a calm
and impartial judgment which we now possess. Men distinguished
by great vigour of mind and great public spirit, were to
be found on opposite sides in the senate and in the camp. None
could have told, when the breach first appeared between Charles
and his parliament, that it would lead to civil war and end in
the crime of regicide. It was necessary to make a choice; and
the choice once made, it required more than ordinary virtue,
more than ordinary courage, to recede; virtue and courage with
which Milton was not endowed.
</p>

<p>
Those, however, who would form a just estimate of Milton's
character must seek him far away from the din of war and the
strife of parties. He had borne a conspicuous part in a memorable
political struggle; his fame had been carried abroad to
distant lands; and yet he retires without regret from public life,
to commune with his own mind in the obscurity of an humble
lodging. The world admires the magnanimity of the old Roman
who, having saved his country from destruction, returned again
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
to his plough and to the simple pleasures of his rustic home.
But there is far more to admire in the closing period of Milton's
career. The hour of his prosperity had passed away; the vigour
of youth was gone. Disappointed in his hopes, neglected
by an age unworthy of his genius, poor, and blind, and
old, his splendid mind rose superior to all these calamities,
which would have crushed a less noble spirit. As if now,
at length, released from the captivity of earthly bonds, he
soars aloft to higher thoughts, and pours forth from an overflowing
soul the lofty strains of his unrivalled poem, the glory of
English literature, the wonder and delight of every succeeding
age. Not often does the history of the world present to us a
spectacle so sublime.
</p>

<p>
Yet how little does genius avail in the one great and important
affair of religion, unless guided and controlled by that infallible
authority which God has established in His Church!
The great doctrinal errors of Milton cannot be imputed to any
want of intellectual power; for, in the natural gifts of intellect,
he was eminently conspicuous. Much rather must they be ascribed
to the erroneous system he employed in the search of
Revealed truth. Starting from false principles, the more
boldly he advanced, the more deeply did he plunge into error.
In common with other Protestants, he accepted the doctrine
of private judgment; but he was distinguished from others by
the logical consistency and inflexible resolution with which he
ever clung to this fundamental principle. Having been taught
not to subject his reason to the authority of a Church which
claimed to be infallible, he refused to submit to the teaching
of a Church which had renounced that claim. His errors were
more extravagant than those of other Protestant writers, only because
he was more fearless in his speculations, more consistent
in his principles, more honest in his speech. Others are often
saved from error because they hesitate to follow the light of
reason, when reason would lead them too far from the beaten
track of received opinions. But such timidity and inconsistency
were little in harmony with the spirit of Milton. He had
learned in early youth, as a first principle, that, in the matter
of religion, Scripture should be his only authority, reason
his only guide; and in after life he was ever prepared to follow
that guide whithersoever it might conduct.
</p>

<p>
The religious career of Milton appears to us, therefore,
in a remarkable manner, at once to illustrate and to disprove
the Protestant <emph>Rule of Faith</emph>. In him it was fairly tried, and
it was found wanting. It would be difficult, we believe,
to select from the whole range of Protestant writers any one
who possessed in a higher degree, those qualities which are
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
favourable to the exercise of private judgment. His distinguished
biographer, Mr. Mitford, who was himself a Protestant
clergyman, has spoken on this subject with great candour
and ability. Referring to the treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Doctrina Christiana</hi>,
he says:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>It is acknowledged by all that it is written with a calm and
conscientious desire for truth, like that of a man who had forgotten
or dismissed the favourite animosities of his youth, and who had retired
within himself, in the dignity of age, to employ the unimpaired
energies of his intellect on the most important and awful subject
of inquiry. The haughtiness of his temper, the defiance of his
manner, his severe and stoical pride, are no longer seen. He approaches
the book of God with an humble and reverential feeling,
and with such a disposition of piety, united to so powerful an intellect,
and such immense stores of learning, who would not have expected
to have seen the <q>star-bright form</q> of truth appear from out
the cloud; but wherever we look, the pride of man's heart is lowered,
and the weakness of humanity displayed. With all his great qualifications
for the removal of error and the discovery of truth, <emph>he failed</emph></q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Life of Milton.</hi> By the Rev. John Mitford: prefixed to his Works. London:
Bickers and Bush. Vol. i. p. cxlvi.</note>
</quote>

<p>
He not only failed, but he seems to have been a perfect type
of that unsteadiness in error which St. Paul describes in his
Epistle to the Ephesians: he was as a little child <q>tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine</q>. He wandered,
we are told, <q>from Puritanism to Calvinism, from Calvinism
to an esteem for Arminius, and finally, from an accordance
with the Independents and Anabaptists to a dereliction of
every denomination of Protestants</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>, p. cxliii.</note> When this was the fate
of his gigantic intellect, how can humbler minds hope to attain
success if they employ the same means?
</p>

<p>
It seems to us, therefore, that we can find some excuse for the
errors of Milton in the false principles which he had imbibed in
his youth. And, with all his faults, we cannot but revere the
magnanimity of his spirit, the splendour of his genius. But we
have no sympathy with those who, having the rich inheritance of
an infallible authority for their guide in matters of religion,
would yet claim for themselves the right to launch forth into
the boundless sea of thought without restriction or restraint;
who blindly embrace the conclusions of Milton, while they reject
his premises; and who imitate him in his wanderings, while
they cannot imitate that nobility of sentiment and that loftiness
of eloquence which shed a lustre even around his errors.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The See Of Killaloe In The Sixteenth
Century.</head>

<p>
In the year 1463, <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Mahoun O'Griffa</hi> was appointed
by Pope Pius II., Bishop of Killaloe. He had hitherto held
the canonry and prebend of Teampul-monin, in the diocese of
Limerick, the annual revenue of which amounted to twenty
marks, and the <hi rend='italic'>Monumenta Vaticana</hi> preserve an interesting
fragment, which records the appointment of Donald Magillapadrig
as his successor in that dignity: <q>Confertur ipsi canonicatus
et prebenda de Tampolmonin in Ecclesia Limericensi
quorum fructus viginti marcharum sterlingorum non excedunt
et quos Mattheus electus Laonensis tempore suae promotionis
obtinebat</q> (17 Decemb., 1463; pag. 455).
</p>

<p>
Dr. O'Griffa died in 1482, and was succeeded the same year
by Terence O'Brien, who ruled the see for forty-three years, and,
as Ware informs us, <q>was a prelate of great account among his
people for his liberality and hospitality</q>.
</p>

<p>
Richard Hogan, a Franciscan, was chosen his successor in
1525, and after an episcopate of fourteen years, was translated
to Clonmacnoise by Pope Paul III., on 16th June, 1539. He,
however, enjoyed this new dignity only for a little while, as, a
few days after his translation, he was summoned to his eternal
reward.
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable that the episcopate of his successor in the see
of Killaloe was equally short; for, <hi rend='italic'>Tirlogh</hi>, in Latin <hi rend='italic'>Theodoricus
O'Brien</hi>, appointed its bishop in June, 1539, died before December
the same year. Both sees being thus vacant at the same
time, <hi rend='italic'>Dr. Florence O'Gerawan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Kirwan, was appointed
bishop of Clonmacnoise and Killaloe on 15th December, 1539,
the union of these sees being at the same time limited to the lifetime
of this bishop. The following is the consistorial entry:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Anno 1539, 15 Decembris: Sua Sanctitas providit Ecclesiis
Claonensi et Laonensi in Hibernia vacantibus per obitum Richardi
et Theodorici de persona fratris Florentii Igernam (sic) ord. Fratrum
Min. cum dispensatione ex defectu natalium et unione duarum Ecclesiarum
ad vitam dicti Florentii</q>.
</quote>

<p>
We have already had occasion to speak of this bishop when
treating of the see of Clonmacnoise (<hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>, part 1., pag.
157); his episcopate was marked by many signal events, and his
zeal in the defence of the Catholic faith merited for him the
hatred of the enemies of our holy Church. He died in 1554,
and had for his successor Terence O'Brien, who received his
appointment in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, and continued
<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
to administer the see till his death, which is registered by
the <hi rend='italic'>Four Masters</hi> in 1569.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Malachy O'Molony</hi> was next proclaimed in consistory on 10th
January, 1571. He suffered much from the agents of the Protestant
establishment: <q>Plurima ab haereticis mala et nonnunquam
carceris acrumnas passus est</q> (Mooney, <hi rend='italic'>MS. Hist. Francis.</hi>); and
on 22nd of August, 1576, his translation to Kilmacduagh was
solemnly promulgated in the Roman court.
</p>

<p>
His successor, <hi rend='italic'>Cornelius O'Melrian</hi>, O.S.F., was appointed
the same month, viz., 26th August, 1576, and for forty-one years,
till his death in 1617, he continued bishop of this ancient see.
This prelate played an important part in the last great struggle
of the Desmond chieftains; and we have intentionally passed
rapidly over the preceding bishops, that space might remain
for dwelling on the unpublished documents connected with his
history. At the time of his appointment to the see of Killaloe,
James Fitzmaurice was actively engaged on the Continent
in enlisting the aid of the Catholic powers in favour of the Irish
confederates. Before setting sail from Lisbon on 30th October,
1577, this chieftain wrote to Gaspar de Quiroza, Archbishop of
Toledo, acquainting him with the disaster which had befallen
our Bishop Cornelius, who, a little while before, having sailed
from Rochelle for the Irish coast, was captured by pirates, and
being despoiled of all he possessed, was obliged to return to the
Continent. Fitzmaurice adds:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>He (Dr. O'Melrian) is most devoted to us, and we confide to him
all the secrets which are to be communicated to you connected with
the succour which is to be sent to us; it would be most useful that
he should accompany the expedition of troops, to instruct them as to
the place for landing; as well as to conduct them to our quarters</q>.
</quote>

<p>
The letter terminates with the sweet old Irish invocation
<q><foreign rend='italic'>spes nostra Jesus et Maria</foreign></q>.
</p>

<p>
When at length a considerable body of Spanish troops set sail
for Ireland, under the command of the unfortunate colonel St.
José, the bishop of Killaloe accompanied them, but soon quitted
their ranks to join the Irish camp and assist the native Desmond
princes by his sacred ministry and counsel. In 1582 he was
instructed by the Earl of Desmond to proceed to Spain and Rome,
and negotiate whatever measures might tend to the succour of
Ireland. The following letters addressed by this Irish chieftain
to the reigning pontiff Gregory XIII., will be read with interest
by all who are acquainted with that sad period of our history;
they are extracted from the Vatican archives:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctissime Pater,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In vinca Domini exercituum laboramus expugnando luteranam
istam Angliae Reginam; toto enim hoc triennio elapso, prout
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
jam bellum gerimus, in armis sumus. Nostrum omnemque statum
omniaque nostra exposuimus periculo evidentissimo semper perdendi,
bellumque istud in Hibernia propter causas subsequentes his tribus
annis elapsis in manus libentissime assumpsimus, nimirum quod
sanctae matris Ecclesiae causa erat, ac quod Vestra Sanctitas jussit,
atque hortabatur ut rem inciperemus. Mihi meisque omnibus
minime peperci, oppida, villas et pagos, arces et castra cum fratribus
nostris Joanne et Jacobo de Geraldinis ac sexdecim aliis ex nostra
domo, in hoc bello perdidimus: nihilominus quamdiu vita comes
fuerit istud bellum prosequemur contra Angliae maledictam Reginam
donec S. Sanctitas ac sua majestas Catholica nos juverit ut
possimus haereticos propellere ex Hibernia totumque Regnum
subjicere legibus sanctae matris Ecclesiae. Et quia hactenus praestolationem
istius subsidii experimur, harum latorem Episcopum
Laonensem nostro et omnium nobilium hujus causae consensu ambasciatorem
et sollicitatorem universi negotii ad Suam Sanctitatem et
ad S. majestatem Catholicam mittimus cui V. Sanctitas omnem fidem
dabit, illumque ita auscultet non secus quam nos si praesentes
fuissemus auscultaret, rogantes obnixe V. Sanctitatem (cui pedes
humili animo exosculamur) ut nostram inquietudinem et longam
perturbationem animadvertat auxiliumque cum hoc nostro ambasciatore
mittatur quo poterimus confringere audaciam adversariorum
Christi Ecclesiae. Expediret denique ut V. Sanctitas auctoritatem
nuncii in negotiis ecclesiasticis mitteret ad Laonensem Episcopum
et potissimum ut ipsi liceat pontificalia officia exercere
ubicumque se invenerit cum licentia ordinarii; vir enim spectatae
vitae et virtutis magnaeque spei apud omnes est, huicque causae
addictissimus, ac fidelissimus.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Datum in Castris Catholicorum in Hibernia,</q></l>
<l>die 1 Septembris, 1582.</l>
<l>"Sanctitatis Vae. addictissimus servus,</l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gerol Desmond</hi></q>.</l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
Two months later the second letter was addressed to the same
great pontiff:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctissime Pater,</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Accepimus a presbytero Hiberno Sanctitatis vestrae litteras
per Cardinalem Comensem datas Romae 6<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>to</hi> Augusti, quibus nobis
patuit Sanctitatis Vestrae propensissimus animus, curaque vigilantissima
nedum erga nos sed etiam erga salutem totius Regni Hiberniae,
adeo ut ad ejus voluntatem in hoc nihil addi potest,
quam pollicetur nos reipsa experturos supernâ elementia opitulante.
Quod vero commissum erat latori qui tulerit litteras ut spem nobis
augeat ac ut in negotio hoc sancto persistamus pedefixo, suo muneri
in hoc satisfecit. Intelligat V. Sanctitas quod quamquam nos
omnia pene temporalia in hoc bello, fidei defensionis causa, amisimus,
et quod multo vehementius nos angit in conflictibus contra
Anglos Ecclesiae feroces hostes nostrum consobrinum D. Jacobum
Geraldinum cum nostris postremo fratribus D. Joanne et Jacobo
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
ac nonnullis aliis ex nostra domo qui successive in hoc bello occubuere,
nihilominus tamen in hac Dei et Sanctitatis Vestrae causa
immobilis permaneo, superni Dei optimi maximi ac Sanctitatis vestrae
praestolaturus auxilium quo possem severos Ecclesiae hostes
propellere ex Regno, illiusque integrum statum legibus sanctae matris
Ecclesiae subjicere; proinde V. Sanctitas quemadmodum in ea omnem
spem habemus non differat nos juvare et quod reliquum erit cum
Rege Catholico ferventissime et quam citissime agere ut auxilium jam
nobis mittatur plenum et sufficiens quo finem huic rei intentae imponamus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ad sollicitandum istud negotium, mense Septembri praeterito
misimus nostrum ambasciatorem Epum. Laonensem ad S. Vestram
et ad Regem Catholicum quem plurimi faciat V. Sanctitas omnem
fidem illi praebendo in omnibus rebus attinentibus ad nos et ad universum
statum illius belli; post cujus discessum ducentos Anglos
in uno conflictu interfecimus, ea enim quae Deus operatus est per
nos contra Anglos ante ejus discessum, autumo illum S. Sanctitati
aperuisse: expediret denique omnino ut cum hoc subsidio postulato
veniat aliquis Nuncii auctoritatem habens inter nos, qui judicio
omnium censendus esset Laonensis, ad quem S. Sanctitas dignetur
etiam harum responsum dirigere ut via sibi cognita nos mox certiores
reddat. Vivat V. Sanctitas nobis in multos annos.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Ex Castris Catholicorum in Hibernia,</q></l>
<l>die 6<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>to</hi> Novembris, 1582.</l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gerol Desmond</hi></q>.</l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
A third letter, dated 18th June in the following year, repeats
the same sentiments of devoted attachment to the Holy
See, and petitions that the lands of the deceased James Geraldine
should be granted to his son, Gerald. It thus concludes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Litteras vero super praedictas terras confectas, V. Sanctitas dignetur
mittere per Nuntium Apostolicum Hispaniarum ad nostrum
Ambasciatorem Cornelium Episcopum Laonensem cui cupimus ut V.
Sanctitas fidem in omnibus adhibeat, eumque fretum auctoritate
Nuntii cum subsidio mittendo ad nos dignetur mittere, quia aliis
palmam praeripit, quibus hoc esset concedendum. Valeat ac vivat
V. Sanctitas in Nestoreos annos.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Ex Castris Catholicorum in Hybernia, 18 Junii.</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Stis. Vae. servus addictissimus prout opera ipsa comprobant contra
adversarios hostesque ecclesiae.</q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Desmond</hi></q>.</l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
In the Vatican archives is also preserved a series of letters of
our bishop Cornelius, addressed to Rome in the years 1582,
1583, and 1584. They are all connected with the diplomatic
mission which he received from the Geraldine princes, and some
of them throw considerable light on the contemporary civil and
ecclesiastical history of our island.
</p>

<p>
Before, however, we present them to the reader, we deem it
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
necessary to remark that the relations of our bishops and of the
Holy See with the native princes during the wars of Elizabeth's
reign have often been misconstrued, in the writings of those
who were led away by the frenzy of political agitation. The
Irish chieftains had at this period the title and privileges of independent
princes; and as such they were entitled to defend
with the sword those religious and civil rights which the government
of Elizabeth attempted to destroy. Hence, their struggle
merited the sympathy of the Holy See and the blessing of our
martyr-clergy. But far more distant than heaven is from earth
were the chivalry of James Fitzmaurice and the heroism of Hugh
O'Neill from that accursed Fenian blight which, alas! has now-a-days
fallen upon some of our benighted and deluded countrymen!
</p>

<p>
We give these letters in chronological order, and in their
original language, that thus our readers may be the better able
to appreciate the sentiments of this distinguished bishop of
Killaloe.
</p>

<p>
1. The first letter is dated Lisbon, 22nd September, 1582,
and was addressed to his Eminence Cardinal de Como:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime Domine,</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Litteras comitis Desmoniae Generalis Catholicorum in
Hibernia cum nostris litteris mittimus ad suam Sanctitatem ex quibus
sua Dignatio Illustrissima plenius intelligat negotium, operamque
det, quaeso, ut huic sanctissimae caussae jam tandem subveniatur:
alioquin actum erit de comite Desmoniae caeterisque Catholicis
qui arma elevarunt fidei defensionis causâ, patriaque illa Hibernia
impiâ potestate reginae maledictae Angliae omnino subjiciatur. Sua
Dignatis Illustrissima dignetur responsum illarum litterarum suae
Sanctitatis per Nuntium Apostolicum Hispaniarum ad nos mittere.
Caeterum talis clausula habetur in mea Bulla quod extra meum episcopatum
etiam cum licentia ordinarii non possem exercere pontificalia.
Proinde rogo suam Dominationem Illmam. ut dignetur alloqui
ea de re Suam Sanctitatem, mihique hinc oris oraculo vel in scriptis
impetrare ut possim cum licentia ordinarii exercere pontificalia, multum
enim hoc proderit. Valeat sua dominatio Illustrissima in Christo
Jesu.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Ex Ulissipona 22 mensis Sept., 1582.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae Dominationis vestrae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. The second letter is addressed to Pope Gregory XIII.,
from Madrid, the 4th December, 1582:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Beatissime Pater,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Cum primum appuleram Ulissiponam ex Hibernia, scripsi
Suae Sanctitati omnem statum totius istius negotii Hiberniae litterasque
<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
comitis Desmoniae Generalis Catholicorum per Nuntium Apostolicum
Hispaniarum suae Sanctitati misi. Tandem usque modo omni diligentia
egi cum rege Catholico, ut negotio subveniret: hanc resolutionem
jam recepi, usque quod sua Majestas sit parata ut subveniat
ac quod in Lusitania habet milites paratos ad expeditionem istius
negotii, et quod istud cum sit negotium sanctae matris Ecclesiae et
fidei restituendae in Hibernia, necesse esse, ut Vestra Sanctitas juvet
atque subveniat, et istud subsidium quod exigitur est pecuniarum ut
praedictis militibus stipendia solvantur. Tandem jussum est ut ego
conferrem me Madritium ut cum Nuntio Apostolico et Cardinali
Granvelano agerem ut ipsi cum Sua Sanctitate solertes agant, ut Sua
Sanctitas ordinet quibus mediis et quo ordine hoc fiat: quare cum
istud negotium sit positum in sinu Sanctitatis Vestrae, atque ab ipso
omnino emanat, rogo atque obtestor S. Sanctitatem ut dignetur subvenire,
ordinemque praescribere, ut pecuniae in subsidium et ad expeditionem
istius negotii dentur ut militibus stipendia solvantur, digneturque
cum sua Majestate agere ut videlicet sine dilatione incipiat
vel cum ipsa postulat, ut non differatur, alioquin actum erit de statu
totius regni Hiberniae et scintilla fidei quae illic adhuc remanet omnino
extinguetur, illudque Regnum quod semper in gremio sanctae
matris Ecclesiae quievit et floruit omnino subjicietur impiae potestati
Reginae maledictae Angliae. Comes enim Desmoniae postquam perdidit
in hoc bello suos fratres germanos cum nonnullis nobilibus ex
sua domo, ingenue fatetur se non posse amplius sustinere istud bellum
sine subsidio sibi pollicito: est igitur illi cito subveniendum antequam
viribus omnino enervetur. Vestra Sanctitas recordetur hanc
caussam esse suam, fidei et sanctae matris ecclesiae, et Hibernorum
qui semper vere filii Sedis Apostolicae sunt, et potissimum comitis
Desmoniae qui omnia sua omnemque suum statum periculo semper
perdendi exposuit fidei defensionis causâ. Valeat et vivat Sanctitas
Vestra in Nestoreos annos.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Madritii, quarto die mensis Decembris 1582.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sanctitatis V. humilis filius et
addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. The letter to the Holy Father was accompanied by another
short letter addressed to the <hi rend='italic'>Cardinalis Comensis</hi> as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime Domine,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In litteris Suae Sanctitatis poteris videre responsum
regis Catholici: respondet enim se habere milites in Lusitania ad
expeditionem nostri negotii Hiberniae, sed necesse esse ut Sua Sanctitas
subministret pecunias ut parti militum stipendia solvantur. Proinde
cum regis ordine veni Ulissipona Madritium ut satagerem cum
Nuntio Apostolico et Cardinali Granvelano, et hoc Suae Sanctitati
detegatur ut cum ejus ordine et subsidio res incipiatur; demonstrat
enim rex nobis se promptissimum esse ut jam subveniat. Cum igitur
istud negotium omnino emanet a sollicitatione Dominationis suae Illmae.
tum cum Sua Sanctitate, tum etiam cum Rege Catholico, rogo
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
atque obtestor suam Dominationem Illmam. ut omni diligentia agat,
ut non differatur istud subsidium mittere ad illos nobiles qui toto hoc
triennio elapso istud exspectant quique omnia sua fidei defensionis
causa perdiderunt....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ex Madritio 4 Decemb., 1582.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae ac Reverendissimae Dominationis Vestrae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. On the 26th of May, the following year, the next letter
was addressed from Madrid to the same cardinal:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Domine,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Accepi suae Dominationis Illustrissimae litteras datas Romae
die 4 Januarii quibus hactenus distuli respondere donec ultimam
resolutionem a sua Majestate Catholica reciperem, quam suae Dominationi
Illustrissimae significare censui ut eam detegat Suae Sanctitati.
Quae quidem est haec, nempe quod sua Majestas sit impedita donec
videat exitum classis euntis in insulas Tertiae, et ea ratione ducebatur
ut me detineret quia comes Desmoniae scripsit ad suam Majestatem
quod si in meo adventu (in quem tum ipse tum caeteri nobiles
tantum confiderunt) istud negotium Hiberniae non haberet prosperum
successum, statim sisteret gradum gerendi bellum, inducias
foedusque componeret cum regina maledicta Angliae. Jam vero ad
nutriendum interim bellum in Hibernia, sua Majestas Catholica
praestitit nobis magnam summam pecuniarum, armorum et victualium
cum quibus ego hinc proficiscor ad portum maris ut illa necessaria
sine dilatione et cum omni diligentia illinc transmittam ad
comitem Desmoniae. Restat jam ut Sua Sanctitas persaepe commendet
istud negotium Hiberniae suae Majestati Catholicae ut finito
negotio praedictae insulae statim negotium nostrum incipiat.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Caeterum secretarius suae Majestatis Catholicae rogat me ut
exerceam Pontificalia in quodam episcopatu hîc cum certa pensione
donec sua Majestas parata erit ad mittendam classem in Hiberniam
gratumque hoc esse, minusque fastidiosum regi affirmat qui
tantis oneribus sumptibusque premitur. Jam in superioribus litteris
petii facultatem exercendi pontificalia et de hoc jam recepi responsum
Suae Sanctitatis per suam Dominationem Illustrissimam videlicet
Suam Sanctitatem dixisse hoc adversari decretis concilii Tridentini et
propterea nullatenus posse concedi. Intelligat Sua Sanctitas hanc
clausulam non esse positam in mea Bulla propter meam culpam,
neque etiam esse positam in Bullis Episcoporum Hibernorum post
me creatorum qui nihil perpessi sunt in hoc bello Hibernico, quemadmodum
ego perpessus sum nullaque praeclara facinora ediderant
quemadmodum longe lateque constat me edidisse, nobilesque Hibernos
esse valde offensos quando dicebam, in campo me non posse exercere
pontificalia extra meum episcopatum etiam cum licentia ordinariorum
loci. Proinde sua Dominatio Illustrissima rogabit Suam
Sanctitatem ut dignetur in praemium laborum susceptorum et suscipiendorum
in hoc bello Hibernico mihi vivae vocis oraculo vel in
scriptis concedere facultatem exercendi pontificalia, et hîc interim
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
quoad rex me detineat, cum licentia ordinariorum, vel, sede vacante,
jussu regis et in Hibernia eodem modo et ubi non sunt Episcopi
Catholici, jussu comitis Desmoniae generalis Catholicorum possem
similiter exercere pontificalia, servatis servandis a jure et a sacro
concilio Tridentino, contra quod aliquid moliri illicitum esse semper
duxi. Quare obtestor suam Dominationem Illustrissimam ut statim et
sine dilatione dignetur de hoc agere cum Sua Sanctitate, hancque
licentiam mihi mittere per Nuncium Apostolicum Hispaniarum, hocque
intelligat non minus gratum esse regi quam comiti Desmoniae,
aliisque nobilibus ejus partem tuentibus in Hibernia. Christus Jesus
suam Dominationem Illustrissimam perquam diutissime nobis sospitem
conservet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Madritii, die 26 Maii, 1583.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae Dominationis Suae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
5. Six weeks later, the Bishop of Killaloe again writes to
the Cardinal de Como, acquainting him with the measures taken
by the Spanish monarch:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Domine,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Quamquam ternas ante has de eadem scripsi tibi litteras
superioribus diebus, tamen ne forte ad ejus manus minime
devenerint, censui rursus has tibi scribere litteras ut intelligat regem
Catholicum mihi respondisse impossibile esse jam classem mitti in
Hiberniam antequam sua Majestas intelligat exitum classis quae jam
proficiscitur ad insulas Tertiae contra Dominum Antonium. Interim
tamen ut bellum facilius sustentetur, in Hibernia praestitit mihi
subsidium pecuniarum, armorum et victualium transmittendum mox
in Hiberniam ad comitem Desmoniae; quorum omnium causa et ex
mandato regio in hoc portu permaneo, donec praedicta omnia mittam
ad Hiberniam quod spero fiet propediem cum nihil aliud praestolatur
nisi ventus prosperus. Interea Rex Catholicus jussit ut pensio mihi
assignaretur qua honeste potuissem me sustentare super Episcopatu
Tigitanensi, interimque classis praeparabitur, cujus proprius pastor
oblitus sui status se junxit Domino Antonio contra Regem Catholicum...</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ex portu de Scetufill, 5 Julii, 1583</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
6. The next letter is dated from Lisbon, the 1st August, 1583,
and is addressed to the Holy Father Gregory XIII.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctissime Pater,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Comes Desmoniae generalis Catholicorum ferventer scripsit
ad me superioribus diebus ut cum Sua Sanctitate agerem ut dignaretur
per Bullam authenticam vel per Breve Apostolicum concedere terras
possessionesque illorum qui interfecerunt Dominum Jacobum Geraldinum
generalem vestrae Sanctitatis in Hibernia, Geraldo Geraldino
filio praedicti D. Jacobi ut ipsi Geraldini vehementius habeant
ansam inserviendi Sedi Apostolicae atque Suae Sanctitati, ac ut adversarii
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
hoc concedendo terreantur ne Sedem Apostolicam impugnent
neve istius Sedis Sanctissimae sint adversarii inter nos qui Anglis
faveant atque opitulentur posthac quemadmodum hactenus. Quocirca
nonnihil conducet negotio atque ad augmentationem fidei in
Hibernia ut Sua Sanctitas consideret servitium Geraldinorum et
potissimum Jacobi Gerald generalis Vestrae Sanctitatis et istius
postremo comitis Desmoniae qui totis viribus impugnat maledictam
reginam ejusque fautores quique progressus felices ipsam impugnando
hactenus habuit. Proinde in praemium horum omnium Vestra Sanctitas
dignetur concedere litteras atque possessiones istorum qui interfecerunt
D. Jacobum Geraldinum, Domino Geraldo Geraldino filio
praedicti D. Jacobi Generalis Vestrae Sanctitatis prout comes Desmoniae
Suae Sanctitati fusissime scripsit: quod si fecerit Sua Sanctitas
rem gratissimam comiti factura sit coeterosque pene nobiles
Hibernos concitabit ut sibi Sedique Apostolicae inserviant, domumque
Geraldinorum semper sibi addictissimam et promptissimam experietur.
Christus Jesus Suam Sanctitatem nobis sospitem conservet
in multos annos.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ex Ulissipona, 1 Augusti, 1583.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sanctitatis Vestrae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>filius atque addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
7. The seventh letter is addressed from Lisbon on 26th Nov.
1583, to Cardinal de Como:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Persaepe hactenus egi litteris cum Sua Sanctitate atque praesentia
et verbo cum sua Majestate Catholica ut omnia tandem dignentur
subvenire Regno Hiberniae misere hactenus desolato. Sed cum
jam tempus adest subveniendi, censui rogare suam Dominationem Illustrissimam
ut dignetur agere cum Sua Sanctitate, ut cum Rege Catholico
agat, ut haec classis quae revertitur ex insula Tertiae transmittatur
ad Hiberniam, qua transmissa Hibernia legibus sanctae
matris ecclesiae atque Anglia propediem subjicietur. Denique haec
erit proximior via qua sua Majestas habebit Flandriam quietam sibique
subjectam....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Valeat Dominus meus Illustrissimus, in Christo Jesu.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ex Ulissipona, 26 Novemb., 1583.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Dominationis Suae Illustrissimae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
8. Three months later another letter was addressed to the
same cardinal, conveying the sad intelligence of the assassination
of the Earl of Desmond:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime Domine,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Suam Dominationem Illustrissimam certiorem reddere
censui de hoc negotio Hiberniae ut Suam Sanctitatem dignetur de illo
informare. Imprimis intelligat Illustrissimus Dominus, Geraldum
Comitem Desmoniae generalem Catholicorum qui erat caput istius
<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
belli Hibernici occubuisse nuperrime et traditorie in bello, ejusque
caput post ejus mortem a nefariis Anglis erat abscissum et transmissum
ex Hibernia ad maledictam Angliae nominatam reginam. Tristissima
ac longe moestissima nova nobis sunt ista ac prorsus de reductione
Hiberniae ad fidem principia desperandi, nisi S. Sanctitas mox
manus adjutrices porrigat, tum subveniendo militibus aut pecuniis,
tum etiam scribendo quam effectuosissime ad suam Majestatem Catholicam,
ut non differat jam mittere classem ad Hiberniam, qua transmissa
universa Hibernia legibus sanctae matris Ecclesiae subjicietur
eritque etiam principium et solidum fundamentum reductionis Angliae
ad fidem: quod si hoc non fiet mox antequam Regina maledicta
iniquis suis legibus subjiciat sibi regnum cum non sit aliquis principalis
qui resistat, actum erit de toto negotio et scintilla fidei quae
huc usque illic viguit omnino extinguetur, eritque Hibernia non secus
quam Anglia referta iniquis legibus maledictae Reginae....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ex Ulissipona, 13 Februarii, 1584.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae Dominationis Vestrae,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
IX. On the 7th of September, 1584, our Bishop again writes
to His Eminence:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime Domine,</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hactenus praestolabar cupidissimo animo profectionem
classis Suae Sanctitatis ac majestatis Catholicae in Hiberniam quod
cum mihi in mandatis a magnatibus Hiberniae et potissimum a
Comite Desmoniae incumbebat, ut hoc sollicitarem, officio non defui
hactenus ut probe novit Sua Dominatio Illustrissima. Jam vero
cum praedictus comes Desmoniae generalis Catholicorum sit interfectus
in bello neminemque alium moliri bellum in Hibernia post
ejus mortem, quinimo omnes obtemperant Reginae, comperio negotium
esse tepidum frigidumque, ac proinde censui oratum iri suam
Dominem. Illustrissimam ut dignetur alloqui Suam Sanctitatem, erga
meam penuriam et necessitatem rerum necessariarum, ob id quod
nihil ex propriis reditibus recipio, et cum Sua Sanctitate satagere ut
aliquid mihi quolibet mense vel annue subministretur per collectorem
Apostolicum commorantem Ulissiponae, ubi cupio commorari prope
nova Hiberniae, donec co classis mittatur aut Regina moriatur, quia
sine una aut altera nequeo adire Hiberniam....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ulissiponae, 7 Septembris, 1584.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sua Dominatio Illustrissima dignetur favere Roberto Laseo
Cancellario Limericensi qui nedum est vir probus ac generosus sed
etiam quam multa perdidit in bello praeterito Hibernico cum Comite
Desmoniae.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae ac Reverendissimae Dom. V.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
X. Another letter was addressed to the Pope on the same
day:
</p>

<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Beatissime Pater</hi>,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Postquam in campo Catholicorum cum comite Desmoniae,
caeterisque nobilibus Regni Hiberniae solus episcopus tribus annis
manseram labores improbos sustinens praedicando, admonendo et imperando
quae expediebant saluti hominum progressuique belli contra
rabidissimos ferocesque ecclesiae hostes Anglos, nihilque interim recipiens
ex proprio Episcopatu, cujus redditus percipiuntur a quodam
haeretico nominato Episcopo qui illic residet ex parte Reginae maladictae
Angliae, me tandem contuli ad has partes jussu comitis Desmoniae
Generalis Catholicorum caeterorumque nobilium sibi adhaerentium
ut officio Ambasciatoris fungerer, nedum cum Sua Sanctitate
sed etiam cum sua Majestate Catholica ut dignaretur sibi mittere
classem vel saltem mediocre subsidium quo bellum feliciter incoeptum
ad optatum finem deduceret, quemadmodum ipse comes suis litteris
adhuc vivens persaepe detexit Suae Sanctitati. Ego hactenus
saepissime egi cum sua Majestate sed subsidium illud exiguum quod
extorsi a sua Majestate adeo dilatum erat ut comes Desmoniae viam
universae carnis ingrederetur in bello, antequam navicula illa cum
armis illis et pecuniis Hiberniam appulerat, unde rediit cum eodem
subsidio ad ministros suae Majestatis Ulissiponam. Porro post mortem
praedicti comitis Desmoniae nullus est in Hibernia qui agit
bellum contra Reginam neque autumo fore postquam viderant comitem
Desmoniae se suumque statum exspectando subsidium tanto
tempore, ne se suumque statum similiter, deperdant quin potius tota
Hibernia obtemperet Reginae. Proinde opus non erit posthac subsidio
mediocri sed classi: quod Sua Sanctitas dignetur agere cum
sua Majestate. Quod si transmittatur, statim universa Hibernia
atque postmodum Anglia legibus sanctae matris ecclesiae subjicietur;
brevior, aptiorque haec via quoque erit ut Rex Catholicus habeat
Flandriam quietam sibique subjectam.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ulissiponae, 7 Sept., 1584.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sanctitatis V. filius,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>atque addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
XI. The last and most important of Dr. O'Melrian's letters is
dated the 29th October, 1584. It is addressed to Cardinal de
Como, and besides many particulars connected with the Archbishops
of Cashel and Tuam, and the Bishops of Emly, Ferns,
Ossory, Ross, and Limerick, we also gather from it that our
bishop, before his promotion to Killaloe, had held some other see,
probably that of Kilmacduagh:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Illustrissime Domine</hi>,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Decem sunt anni elapsi ex quo Sua Sanctitas me creavit
Episcopum: tamen postquam me contuli ad Hiberniam nullum ingressum
habui ad meum Episcopatum qui occupatus a quodam
Pseudo-Episcopo Reginae qui dumtaxat colligit reditus, minime
gerens curam animarum, totoque hoc tempore neque ingressum unius
diei in Episcopatum, neque obolum ex meis redditibus potui habere
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
neque spero me habiturum nisi post mortem Reginae, aut nisi classis
a S. Sanctitate et Majestate Catholica mittatur cum qua eo irem.
Itaque hactenus cum Comite Desmoniae caeterisque nobilibus sibi
adhaerentibus mansi in Hibernia in castris Catholicorum, me praebens
ut decuit praeclarum exemplar omnium virtutum improbos labores et
inediam sustinens, praedicando, exhortando, admonendo, severitatem
aliquoties cum lenitate adhibendo in corrigendis vitiis, et persuadendo
semper quae expediebant saluti hominum progressuique belli contra
rabidissimos atque feroces Ecclesiae hostes Anglos. Placuit tandem
comiti Desmoniae generali Catholicorum, caeterisque proceribus me
mittere huc, fretum auctoritate Ambasciatoris ut cum Sua Sanctitate
atque Majestate Catholica agerem de classe vel subsidio mittendo ad
Hiberniam quod cum omni diligentia cum Sua Sanctitate litteris egi
ut probe novit sua Dominatio Illma.; verbo voce et praesentia egi cum
sua Majestate Catholica vixque extorsi naviculam unam cum armis et
pecuniis, quae antequam appulerat Hiberniam, repererat comitem
Desmoniae interfectum esse in bello, caeterosque suos dilapsos esse
adeo ut mentio belli minime habebatur: tunc rursum idem subsidium
rediit huc, quod ego integrum restitui ministris suae Majestatis Catholicae.
Jam nihilominus solerter ago cum sua Majestate ut dignetur
classem vel saltem subsidium mediocre mittere ad Hiberniam cum Domino
Mauritio Geraldino consobrino comitis Desmoniae qui his diebus
causâ implorandi subsidium tum a S. Sanctitate tum a Rege Catholico
evolavit ex Hibernia huc. Vehementer etiam rogo suam Dominationem
Illustrissimam ut dignetur agere cum Sua Sanctitate ut hinc subveniatur
ac ut S. Sanctitas mox dignetur ea de re agere cum sua Majestate;
quia iste est vir strenuus, nobilis et expertissimus in rebus bellicis, qui
in bello hoc praeterito comitis Desmoniae nonnullas victorias principales
habuit contra Anglos: Sua enim Sanctitas plurimum tenetur
Geraldinis qui se suumque statum exposuerunt periculo semper perdendi
in servitio Suae Sanctitatis. Caeterum sua Dominatio Illustrissima
intelligat me hic Ulissiponae morari prope nova Hiberniae et
sollicitando continue cum sua Majestate ut mittat subsidium alicujus
momenti vel classem ad Hiberniam....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Creatio Episcoporum jam, nisi mittatur classis nedum est inutilis
sed nociva quia hoc tempore aegre possunt creari atque prodesse in
Hibernia vel in Anglia (praeter partes Ultoniae in Hibernia) quia
utrobique non habent nisi latere et incedere vestitu saeculari vel
militari strictis cinctisve gladiis et pugionibus sine tonsura aut corona,
sine habitu clericali sine reditibus et obedientia a suis: et ita adhuc
si convincantur episcopos esse poena capitis vel perpetui carceris
plectentur et eorum parentes vel consanguinei apud quos versabantur
secrete, omnia bona sua et terras per edictum Reginae fisco perdent....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Archiepiscopus Cashellensis gloriosissime et constantissime martyrium
perpessus est Dublinae, qui quamvis acerrimis poenis agitabatur
nullo pacto poterat duci, ut iniquis legibus Reginae obtemperaret;
qui ex primo die quo se contulit ad Hiberniam in habitu saeculari
(aliter enim non potuit) versabatur, donec erat comprehensus ut
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
explorator, qui quidem cum erat percontatus si erat Ecclesiasticus
necne, fassus est se Archiepiscopum esse et in fide constantissime
et gloriosissime mortuus est. Sed, quod doleo, jam non publice sed
secreto et sine plebe martyrio coronantur, quem ad modum iste archiepiscopus
a tribus dumtaxat militibus erat suspensus ne alios incitaret
aut inflammaret ad Christianam religionem.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Episcopus vero Imolacensis constans in fide carceribus Dublinae
detinetur cui jam preparant ocreas plumbeas ut adhibito igne (quem
ad modum fecerunt prius Archiepiscopo) in tormentis fidem deneget.
Episcopus vero Feruensis, prius consentiens Anglis, poenitentia ductus
ultro se obtulit pro fide qui jam teterrimis carceribus sine foramine
lucis detinetur. Archiepiscopus Tuamensis non aliter erat in Hibernia
quam in habitu saeculari, qui postquam rediit ad Hispaniam, diem
clausit extremum. Thomas vero Ossoriensis Episcopus mansit in
Hibernia aliquot mensibus in habitu saeculari, tandem contulit se ex
Hibernia ad Hispaniam. Episcopus Limericensis et Episcopus Rossensis
postquam venerant Roma in curia Regis Hispaniarum degunt.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Videat Dominus meus Illustrissimus quod horum Episcoporum
creatio magis obest quam prodest, quamvis illic affirmarunt se posse
prodesse; proinde alii non sunt audiendi qui petunt promoveri ad
Episcopatus, quum obesse potius possunt quam prodesse. Valeat
Dominus meus Illustrissimus in Christo Jesu.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ulissiponae, 29 Oct. 1584.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Illustrissimae ac Reverendissimae Dominationis V.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>addictissimus servus,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cornelius Laonensis</hi> Episcopus</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This is the last letter we have met with from the illustrious
Bishop of Killaloe, Dr. O'Melrian. His episcopate continued
till 1617; yet the only event recorded concerning him during
this long interval is his having examined the work of Stanihurst,
<hi rend='italic'>De Moribus et Rebus Hiberniae</hi>, and on the margin opposite
each error his solemn condemnation was found marked with the
simple formula: <hi rend='italic'>mentitur</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Cath.</hi>, pag. 121).
</p>

<p>
As regards the bishops of the Establishment, that of <hi rend='italic'>James
Curyn</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Corrin</hi>, seems to have been the first appointment made
by King Henry VIII. Some call him Bishop of Killaloe as early
as 1529, during the episcopate of Dr. Hogan; others date his
appointment from 1539/40. At all events it is probable he is the
bishop that is referred to in the letter of Dr. Browne to Lord
Cromwell on 16th February, 1539/40, when he complains that the
Lord Deputy <emph>in O'Brien's country</emph> <q>deposed a bishop who was
promoted by the king's highness, ... and he that the Lord
Deputy hath now promoted to the same is a Gray Friar (Dr.
O'Kirwan), one of the holy confessors of the late Garrantys,
even as rank a traitor as ever they were</q> (<hi rend='italic'>State Papers</hi>, iii.
123). Dr. Corrin resigned the see in 1546, and Cornelius
O'Dea was appointed by the king in July, the same year, and,
<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>
as Ware tells us, he held the see about nine years. The next
crown nominee was Moriertach O'Brien. Though appointed
by Queen Elizabeth in 1570, he was for a long time content
with the enjoyment of the temporalities of the see, and it was
only in 1577 that he received episcopal consecration. John
Rider, the next Protestant bishop, was appointed in 1612: he
is chiefly remarkable for a Latin dictionary which he compiled,
and in which he was accused of taking both the substance and
words from the Lexicon of Thomas Thomatius.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Sacrament Of Penance In The Early
Irish Church.</head>

<p>
The name <emph>Soul's-friend</emph> (in Irish,) was a characteristic
title used in the old Irish language to designate those who
are now called <emph>confessors</emph>, whose mission it is to receive the confessions
of the faithful and to heal by the sacrament of penance,
the spiritual wounds inflicted on the soul after baptism. <q>Sure
we are</q>, writes Usher, <q>that it was the custom of the faithful in
our ancient Church, to confess their sins to the priests, that they
might be made partakers of the benefit of the keys for the quieting
of their troubled consciences</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Discourse on the Religion, etc.</hi>,
p. 46.
</p>

<p>
Our old commentator, Claudius, more than once repeats this
doctrine, and teaches that the power of forgiving sins was granted
by the divine Redeemer to His apostles and their successors in
the priesthood: <q>The power of loosing and binding</q>, he says,
<q>was granted to all the apostles by our Saviour, when, appearing
to them after His resurrection, He breathed upon them, and said:
Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose sins you shall forgive, they
are forgiven, and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained.
Even to the present day this duty devolves upon the Church in
its bishops and priests, and having examined each sinner's cause,
they absolve those whom they find humble and truly penitent,
from the fear of eternal death, but such as they find to persist in
their sins, these are bound down unto never-ending torments</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>In
Matth. Codex Vatican.</hi>, fol. 149, b.
</p>

<p>
Elsewhere, expounding the history of the man who was sick
with the palsy, he remarks: <q>The scribes say truly that none
can forgive sins save God alone, who also it is that forgives
through those to whom he has given the power of forgiving</q>.
And again, <q>St. John teaches us, in regard to the remission of
sins, that our Saviour after His resurrection promised to His disciples
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
that those shall be bound whom they shall bind, and those
shall be loosened whom they shall loosen</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>In Matth. ibid.</hi>, fol.
81, and <hi rend='italic'>Usher</hi>, loc. cit., pag. 48.
</p>

<p>
The old penitential canons of our Church will serve as a practical
commentary on these texts of Claudius. Thus, in the synod
held by our apostle, together with Auxilius and Isernimus, about
the year 450, we find the canon:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>A Christian who has committed murder, or fornication, or gone
to a soothsayer after the manner of the gentiles, for every such crime
shall do a year of penance: when his year of penance is accomplished
he shall come with witnesses, and afterwards he shall be absolved by
the priest</q>.<note place='foot'>Ap. <hi rend='italic'>Usher</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi>, p. 47: <hi rend='italic'>Villaneuva Synod. S. Patricii</hi>, p. 3.</note>
</quote>

<p>
St. Finnian too prescribes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Si quis rixam faciat de clericis aut ministris Dei, hebdomadam
dierum poeniteat cum pane et aqua et petat veniam a Deo suo et
proximo suo, plena confessione et humilitate et sic potest Deo reconciliari
et proximo suo</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poenitentiale</hi>, can. 5.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The synodical canons <hi rend='italic'>de Arreis</hi>, in one decree declare as the
substitute for the penance of a year:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Tres dies cum mortuo sancta in sepulchro, sine cibo et potu
et sine somno sed cum vestimento circa se, et cantatione psalmorum
et oratione horarum per confessionem et votum sacerdoti</q>.
</quote>

<p>
And in another case they enact a similar penance:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>post confessionem peccatorum coram sacerdote et plebe post
votum</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Arreis</hi>, § 3 and § 4.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The penitential of St. Cummian commands him who had innocently
told an untruth <q>to confess his fault to the person whom
he deceived and to the priest</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poenitent.</hi>, v. 12.</note> Again, youths before their
twentieth year committing certain sins, were ordered for the first
offence <q>having confessed, to do penance for twenty days before
they should approach the holy Communion</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, ii. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Columbanus is even more minute in treating of this sacrament.
Thus, in canon the fourteenth, he lays down the penance
for the sin of adultery, and adds that this penance being performed
by the sinner <q>culpa illius per sacerdotem abstergatur</q>.
Should his sin be a sin of desire, <q>Confiteatur culpam suam sacerdoti
et ita quadraginta diebus in pane et aqua poeniteat</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poenitentiale</hi>, can. 14 and can. 23.</note>
Special diligence, too, was to be observed when preparing to approach
<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
the Holy Eucharist, and not only the heinous crimes, but
even the venial faults were to be confessed. <q>Confessiones autem
dari diligentius praecipitur, maxime de commotionibus animi,
antequam ad missam eatur, ne forte quis accedat indignus ad
altare, id est si cor mundum non habuerit</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poenitentiale</hi>, can. 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the ancient collection of canons made for the use of our
Irish Church about the year 700, there is one book (the 48th)
entitled <hi rend='italic'>de Poenitentia</hi>. The thirty-three chapters into which it
is divided are for the most part moral or disciplinary: as, for
instance, the twenty-fifth chapter, which enjoins that all penitents
should receive <emph>imposition of hands</emph> from the priests during Lent,
moreover, should carry the dead to the place of sepulture, and
there inter them, and, in fine, should present themselves kneeling
at all the functions of the Church from Easter to Pentecost. There
are, however, some incidental passages which beautifully illustrate
the idea entertained by our fathers of the necessity and
advantages of sacramental confession. Thus in the third chapter
the words of St. Augustine are adopted:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Why will the sinner seek to conceal what he committed in the
presence of God? Why will he blush to confess those sins with
which he did not blush to stain his own soul? Therefore, let him
defray by confession what he has contracted by sinning; let him by
satisfaction wash away the stains which defile his soul; let him by
vigilance supply for his former neglect; let him for the future be a
follower of Christ by virtuous deeds, as hitherto he had followed
Satan by his sins; and he may rest assured that God will not punish
him for those crimes which he has confessed</q>.
</quote>

<p>
Subsequently it adopts the well-known passage from the
Homilies of St. Gregory the Great:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>As the physician cannot apply his remedy unless he knows in
what the malady of his patient consists, so cannot sins be healed
without confession; for, with our heart we believe unto justice, but
with our lips confession is made unto salvation. He who conceals his
sins cannot be directed; but he who confesses them and relinquishes
them all, will obtain mercy</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Collect. Hib. Canonum</hi>, xlviii. 3.
</quote>

<p>
In the other fragments which are still preserved of our early
literature, we find many passages connected with the same great
sacrament. Thus St. Mochta, in his <hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi>, amongst the
other articles of faith, professes: <q>Poenitentiam peccatorum
plenissima fide suscipimus ac veluti secundam gratiam suspicamur</q>
(see <hi rend='italic'>Essays on the Early Irish Church</hi>, pag. 302); that
is to say, it is the only plank that remains to him after shipwreck.
</p>

<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>

<p>
Amongst the Irish MSS. preserved in the public library of
Basle, in Switzerland, there is one (Ff. iii. 15) which presents a
curious form of prayer to be observed by our clergy when
administering the sacrament of penance. We give it in full in
its original language; the reader will remark that it omits the
form of absolution, for which it refers to <emph>the sacramentary</emph>, and
the words which we here enclose within parentheses are written
as rubric in the original manuscript:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Incipit ordo ad poenitentiam dandam.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Credis in Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum? <hi rend='italic'>Respondet</hi>:
Credo.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Credis, quod istae tres personae, quo modo diximus, Pater et
Filius et Spiritus Sanctus, tres sunt, et unus Deus est? <hi rend='italic'>Respondet</hi>:
Credo.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Credis, quad in ista ipsa carne in qua nunc es, habes resurgere
in die judicii et recipere sive bonum sive malum quod egisti?
<hi rend='italic'>Respondet</hi>: Credo.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Vis dimittere illis quicumque in te peccaverint, Domino dicente,
si non remiseritis hominibus peccata eorum, nec Pater vester
coelestis dimittet vobis peccata vestra? <hi rend='italic'>Respondet</hi>: Dimitto.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>(Et require diligenter; si est incestuosus, si non vult ipsa incesta
dimittere, non potes ei dare poenitentiam: et si vult ipsa incesta
dimittere, <emph>fac eum confiteri omnia peccata sua</emph>, et ad ultimum diecre.)</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Multa sunt peccata mea, in factis in verbis et in cogitationibus</q>.
</p>

<p>
(Tunc da illi poenitentiam et dic istas orationes super eum.)
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Oremus. Praeveniat hunc famulum tuum <hi rend='italic'>N.</hi> Domine, misericordia
tua, et omnes iniquitates ejus celeri indulgentia doleat. Per, etc.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Oremus. Exaudi, Domine, preces nostras et confitentium tibi
parce peccatis ut quos conscientiae reatus accusat, indulgentia tuae
pietatis absolvat.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>(Et caeteras, si tempus habueris sicut in sacramentario continentur.
Si tibi non vacat, istae sufficiant. Et si homo ingeniosus
est, da ei consilium ut veniat tempore statuto ad te aut ad alium
sacerdotem in coena Domini et <emph>reconcilietur sicut in sacvamentario continetur</emph>.
Quicquid manens in corpore consecutus non fuerit hoc est
<emph>reconciliatione</emph>, exutus carne consequi non poterit. Si vero minus
intelligens fuerit, quidquid ipse non intelligit in uno statu reconciliare,
potes eum ita dicendo:)</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Oremus. Praesta, quaesumus Domine, dignum poenitentiae
fructum huic famulo ut ecclesiae tuae sanctae a cujus integritate
deviarat peccando, admissorum veniam consequendo reddatur
innocens. Per Dominum.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>(Si infirmus est homo, statim reconciliare eum debes.)</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus terminates this curious fragment of the ritual observances
of our early Church. Another Irish manuscript of the same
library in Basle contains a long penitential prayer, the language
of which has a striking resemblance with the prayers of St. Colgu
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
and Aileran, already published in the early numbers of the
<hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>. It thus begins:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>De conscientiae reatu ante Altare,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Domine Deus omnipotens, ego humiliter te adoro,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es Rex Regum et Dominus Dominantium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es arbiter omnis saeculi,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es redemptor animarum,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es liberator credentium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es spes laborantium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es paraclitus dolentium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es via errantium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es magister gentium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es creator omnium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es amator omnis boni,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es princeps omnium virtutum,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es amator virginum,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es fons sapientium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es fides credentium,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es lux lucis,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es fons sanctitatis,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es gloria Dei Patris in excelsis,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu sedes ad dexteram Dei Patris,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In alto throno regnans in saecula.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ego te peto ut des mihi remissionem omnium peccatorum meorum,
Deus meus Jesu Christe.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es qui neminem vis perire sed omnes vis salvos fieri et ad
agnitionem veritatis venire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tu es qui ore tuo sancto et casto dixisti: in quacumque die conversus
fuerit peccator, vita vivet et non morietur.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ego revertor ad Te....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ideo confiteor tibi Domine Deus meus, qui solus sine peccato es:
et obsecro te, Jesu Christe, Deus misericordiarum per passionem et per
effusionem sanguinis tui, atque per signum ligni salutiferi crucis tuae
ut concedas mihi remissionem omnium peccatorum meorum, non
secundum meum meritum, sed secundum magnam misericordiam
tuam</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The <q>Rule for the Celi-De</q>, composed by St. Maelruan about
the year 780, reckons <q><emph>the divulging of confession</emph>, so as to say,
this is what the man did</q>, as so heinous a crime <q>that it is not
penanced in the land of Erinn</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Curry MSS.</hi> § 60; and Dr. Reeves on <hi rend='italic'>The Culdees</hi>, pag. 209.</note> It also contains several regulations
connected with the sacrament of penance. Thus, on the
eve of the chief festivals, all feasting is prohibited, <q>because of
going under the hand to-morrow</q>. To which words Dr. Reeves
adds the following note: <q>The priest raises his hand in the absolution,
whence the modern expression <emph>going under the hand of
the priest</emph> denotes going to confession</q> (pag. 202). Subsequently
the Rule enacts:
</p>

<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When they do not go to hand (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to confession) on Sunday,
they go on the Thursday after; it would be too long to wait till the
Sunday following for the person who habitually goes to hand every
Sunday, because these two days are always special with them at Mass.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It is not necessary to delay minute confessions of thoughts and
idle notions, and abuse and anger, till Sunday, but to confess them
immediately as they occur.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He who makes his confession to a <emph>soul-friend</emph>, if he performs the
penance according to his directions, need not confess them to another
<emph>soul-friend</emph>, but only what has subsequently occurred. Frequent
confession is not profitable when the transgressions are frequent too</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Some instructions are also given for the guidance of the
confessor:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Difficult, indeed, is the duty of the <emph>soul-friend</emph>, because if he
gives the proper remedy, it is oftener violated than observed; but if
the soul-friend does not give it, its liability falls upon himself;
because several are satisfied with making the confession without
doing the penance; but it is better to proclaim their welfare to them,
though they do not respond to the penance enjoined by the confessor.
Another soul-friend may be gone to, if necessary, after the permission
of the first soul-friend.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is right to refuse the confession of a person who does not perform
penance according to the soul-friend, unless there happens to
be a soul-friend near, whom he considers more learned in rules, in
the ways of the Scripture, and in the practices of the saints. Let
him heed what he receives from the learned soul-friend whom he
first met, to whomsoever he may reveal his confession each time,
and let penance be enjoined him according to the rules of frequent
confession</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In fine, it is also decreed that the bishop <q>who confers noble
orders upon any one who is not able to instruct in religion and
reading, and soul-friendship, and who has not a knowledge of
laws and rules, and of the proper remedy for all sins in general,
is an enemy to God and man; for that bishop has offered an insult
to Christ and His Church, and hence shall do penance for six
years, and he shall pay seven <foreign rend='italic'>cumhals</foreign> in gold as a penalty to
God.<note place='foot'>Reeves, loc. cit., pag. 202, seqq. The <foreign rend='italic'>cumhal</foreign> in the Latin documents is expressed
by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ancilla</foreign>. Its literal meaning is <emph>bondmaid</emph>, whose equivalent was reckoned
at three cows. See O'Donovan, <hi rend='italic'>Book of Rights</hi>, page 139.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
The Rule of St. Carthage (who was familiarly called <hi rend='italic'>Mochuda</hi>)
has already been published in full in the December
and January numbers of the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>. Frequent mention is made
in it of the holy sacrament of penance, and as St. Carthage
died before the year 640, we are thus enabled to trace back the
Catholic tenets of our fathers even to the beginning of the seventh
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
century. At page 116, among <hi rend='italic'>the duties of a priest</hi> is commemorated:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>If you go to give communion</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>At the awful point of death,</l>
<l>You must receive confession</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Without shame, without reserve.</l>
<l>Let him receive your sacrament</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>If his body bewails.</l>
<l>The penitence is not worthy</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Which turns not from evil....</l>
<l>If you be anybody's soul-friend,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His soul thou shalt not sell;</l>
<l>Thou shalt not be a blind man leading the blind;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou shalt not allow him to fall into neglect;</l>
<l>Let them give thee their confession</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Candidly and devoutly</q>.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Whilst confession was thus enjoined on the faithful, it was not
less necessary for the religious themselves:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>When you come unto the mass&mdash;</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It is a noble office&mdash;</l>
<l>Let there be penitence of heart, shedding of tears,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And throwing up of the hands, ...</l>
<l>With confession of vices,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>When you come to receive</q>.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And again, when laying down special rules for monks, St. Carthage
commands them to exercise modesty and meekness:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>With inculcation of every truth;</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With denunciation of every wickedness;</l>
<l>With perfect frequent confessions,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Under the directions of a holy abbot</q>.<note place='foot'>Page 173.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The testimony of these religious rules is of great importance:
they not only convey to us the teaching of individuals remarkable
for their piety and learning, but they moreover record for our
instruction those disciplinary enactments which received the
solemn sanction of the greatest saints of our ancient Church, and
which guided in the paths of perfection thousands of our countrymen
whose virtues and miracles won for our island a wide-spread
fame for sanctity throughout the sixth and succeeding centuries.
</p>

<p>
We may now refer to facts connected with these sainted
fathers of our Church which throw much light on the practice
of confession, from the earliest period of faith in our island.
Thus, of St. Adamnan we read that, being troubled about some
sin of his early youth <q>he resorted to a priest from whom he
hoped to learn the way of salvation, and confessing his fault
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
prayed for such counsel as might enable him to flee from the
avenging anger of God</q>.<note place='foot'><q>Accedens ad sacerdotem a quo sibi sperabat iter salutis posse demonstrari
confessus est reatum suum</q>, etc.&mdash;Bede, <hi rend='italic'>H. Eccl.</hi>, iv. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the life of St. Columba, too, it is recorded that one day an
Irishman from Connaught, by name Ildran, landed on the beach
of Iona and proceeded to the guest-house of the monastery. On
the following morning he made known to the saint the object of
his journey, viz.: to do penance for his sins, and <q>at the same
hour he confessed all his sins and promised to fulfil the laws of
penance</q>.<note place='foot'><q>Eadem hora omnia confessus peccata leges poenitentiae flexis genibus se impleturum
promisit</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vita S. Columb.</hi>, ii. 39, <hi rend='italic'>edit. I.A.S.</hi>, p. 157.</note> On another occasion St. Columba was visited by a
person named Fiachna, who, being touched with remorse for
some crime, fell at the saint's feet and <q>confessed his sins before
all that were there present</q>, whereupon the holy man weeping
embraced him, and said, <q>Arise, my son, and be comforted; thy
sins are forgiven thee, for, as it is written, the contrite and humble
heart God doth not despise</q>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 59. See also lib. i. cap. 17, p. 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the case of a chieftain named Suibhne, it is mentioned
that, though truly penitent, he was ordered by St. Pulcherius to
confess his sins.<note place='foot'>Vita S. Pulcher, <foreign rend='italic'>alias</foreign> Mochoemogue, who lived in the seventh century, cap. xix.,
ap. Colgan, p. 592: <q>Videns eum vir Dei visitatum verâ poenitentia, ait ei: confitere
peccata tua et esto de caetero fidelis in omnibus</q>.</note> We find also St. Maidoc of Ferns earnestly
soliciting to have a wise confessor divinely destined for his guidance.
St. Molua of Clonfert-molua was the person chosen by
him, and hence, amongst other titles given to this last-named saint,
is <q>Father of the Confession of Maidoc</q>.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Martyrol. of Donegal</hi>, p. 211, and <hi rend='italic'>Vita S. Maidoc</hi>, cap. xx., and liv. ap.
<hi rend='italic'>Colgan</hi>, p. 208, seqq. St. Dubthach of Armagh is also famous in our annals as
being the <q>chief confessor of Ireland and Albany</q> (Colgan, <hi rend='italic'>Tr. Thaum.</hi>, p. 298);
and St. Gormgal of Ardoilean is similarly eulogised by the Four Masters, ad. an.
1017. <hi rend='italic'>Conf. Colgan, Act. SS.</hi>, p. 141.</note> Again, in the life of
St. Finbar it is mentioned that a young man from Leinster went
to Iona to be guided by Columba: being obliged soon after to
return to his native country, he thus affectionately addressed the
holy abbot: <q>O sancte Dei! quomodo in patria mea vivam et
tibi confitear peccata mea?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vita</hi>, cap. 22, <hi rend='italic'>Tr. Colgan</hi>, p. 353; Reeves' <hi rend='italic'>Columba</hi>, p. 213, note <hi rend='italic'>k</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Martyrology of Donegal</hi>, St. Meallan of Loch Oirbsen,
in Connaught, is styled the <hi rend='italic'>Anmehara</hi> of St. Furse, who since the
middle of the seventh century is venerated as patron of Peronne
in France (pag. 40, I.A.S., 1865). In the <hi rend='italic'>Felire</hi> of Aenghus,
St. Donnan of Eigg is also said to have gone to St. Columcille
<q>to make him his soul's friend</q> (Reeves' <hi rend='italic'>Columba</hi>, p. 305).
This title of <hi rend='italic'>Anmchara</hi> is given to the divine Redeemer himself
by St. Aileran, in the beautiful prayer printed in the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>,
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
pag. 64, and, as we have already said, was the name given by the
faithful in our early Church to those who in the Latin records
are styled <hi rend='italic'>Confessarii</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Patres Confessionis</hi>. The <hi rend='italic'>Book of
Fenagh</hi> in one of its most ancient records states, that <q>Columba
plus venit ad S. Kilianum et ei confessus est peccata sua</q>
(I.A.S. <hi rend='italic'>Miscellany</hi>, vol. i., pag. 118). Of St. Finbarr it is also
recorded that, on the death of his spiritual director, he went to
St. Olan to make him <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>patrem confessionis suae</foreign>, or at least to be
directed by him as to the person whom he should select; and
the legend adds that St. Olan replied: <q>Christ Himself will be
your confessor, and He will receive your hand</q>; meaning, probably,
that the hour of his death was come, for the next fact mentioned
in St. Finbarr's life is his happy passage to eternity (<hi rend='italic'>Life
of St. Finbarr</hi>, edited by R. Caulfield. London, 1864, pag. 21).
</p>

<p>
Probus, in the life of our great Apostle (chap. 20), mentions
that one of the chief petitions which he made to God, during
the time of his penitential retirement on Croaghpatrick, was:
<q>Ut unusquisque homo fidelis Hibernorum per poenitentiam et
confessionem Deo satisfaciens licet in extremo vitae suae spatio,
ab ipso elementer suscipiatur</q>. It was to become sharer of this
great privilege that St. Cormac, Bishop and King of Cashel,
baying foretold his death, summoned to him St. Macsuach,
Abbot of Castledermot, to whom he made his confession, and
received from his hands the holy sacrament of the Eucharist.
(I.A.S. 1860. <hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi>, pag. 203).
</p>

<p>
The confession even of venial faults was especially dwelt upon
by St. Molua. One of his religious was negligent on this head,
and St. Molua took occasion to correct him by his own example.
As they were journeying together on a certain day, St. Molua
said to him: <q>Peccavi vere hodie quia confessionem alicui seniori
non feci de his quae egi hodie: me igitur hic sustine modicum
donec vadam illuc et confitear</q>. The religious was struck with
terror, and asked <q>would it not suffice to confess these sins to
God alone?</q> but the saint replied that unless we confess even
our venial transgressions, we can only obtain pardon for them by
severe penitential deeds here and hereafter, and added the well-known
illustration: <q>Sicut pavimentum domus scopâ quotidie
tergitur, ita anima quotidianâ confessione</q>. The ancient life
concludes; <q>Hoc audiens monachus a suo sancto Abbate, promisit
confiteri sua offendicula; et confitebatur fideliter, et sanatus
est ille frater a sua praeterita audacia</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Vita ex Vet. Cod.
Armac.</hi>, edited by Fleming, cap. 32.)
</p>

<p>
There is only one document to which the enemies of our holy
faith can appeal as evidencing a disregard for the sacrament of
penance in our early Church: it is a letter of Alcuin, addressed,
in the text of Canisius, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dilectissimis viris fratribus et patribus
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>
in provincia Scotorum</foreign>, in which he mentions the rumour which
had reached him, that the laity had refused <q>confessionem sacerdotibus
dare</q>. Here (writes Dean Murray) is a clear rejection
of Popery. However, antiquarians have long since decided that
this text has no reference to sacramental confession (see Lanigan,
iv. 67): and as the good Protestant dean had given his citation
from Usher, he should have added that in Usher's opinion the
title of this letter of Alcuin was erroneous, and that it was addressed
to some faithful quite distinct from our old Celtic forefathers.
This opinion no longer admits of any doubt. Canisius
himself remarked <q>that in the MS. from which he published
this letter, it was addressed <hi rend='italic'>de dilectissimis, etc. in provincia Gothorum</hi></q>,
and he merely substituted the word <foreign rend='italic'>Scotorum</foreign>, as a conjecture,
not knowing that there were any people in the days of
Alcuin who still retained the name of <hi rend='italic'>Gothic</hi>. Later discoveries,
however, have proved that the very province of Languedoc, in
which territory Alcuin lived for a long time, was designated by
this name. The learned Quercetanus discovered a letter of
Alcuin himself (ep. 99), addressed to the faithful <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in diversis
Gothiae partibus</foreign></q>; and Baluzius, in his <hi rend='italic'>Miscellanea</hi> (i. 377), published
another letter of the same Alcuin, <q><hi rend='italic'>iis qui sunt in Gothiae
partibus</hi></q>. The errors of Felix Urgellitanus, which are here
referred to, fix more and more the district to which this letter
was addressed; for whilst they had begun to creep in amongst
the faithful of France, they were wholly unheard of in the Island
of Saints.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Richard Fitz-Ralph, Archbishop Of Armagh.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Many a mile have I gone, and many did I walk,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>But never saw a holier man than Richard of Dundalk</q>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Old Couplet.</hi><note place='foot'>This couplet is quoted by Prince in his <hi rend='italic'>Worthies of Devon</hi> from <hi rend='italic'>Paul</hi> Harris,
c. 5, p. 88, who thus introduces it, <q>of whose (Fitz-Ralph's) sanctity the common
people of Ireland by ancient tradition were wont to chaunt this distich</q>. In the
loose papers prefixed to the <hi rend='italic'>Martyrology of Donegal</hi>, the verses are quoted from
<hi rend='italic'>Henry</hi> Harris in <hi rend='italic'>Apolu</hi>. This false reference has led Dr. Todd into a slight mistake,
vide <hi rend='italic'>Martyr. of Donegal</hi>, App. to Int. p. xlii.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<div>
<head>§ I. Introduction.</head>

<p>
In all the habits of social life many of the early English
settlers in Ireland soon became more Irish than the Irish themselves.
In the vigorous tenacity of their attachment to the Catholic
religion some of these families have ever remained as Irish as
the Irish themselves. Having made our people their people, they
became sharers in our grace of faith, so as to keep ever since our
God their God. To the Talbots and the Plunkets we owe two
<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
great archbishops, whose figures stand out prominently even among
the illustrious band of prelates who fought the good fight in the
days of the persecutors. And as our Church reckons Anglo-Irish
bishops among her martyrs, so among her doctors who guarded
and enriched the sacred deposit of faith we may count Anglo-Irish
prelates equally illustrious: and of these the subject of the
present notice offers a distinguished example. A variety of great
qualities, rarely united in one individual, gives a singular attractiveness
to the history of Richard Fitz-Ralph, Archbishop of Armagh.
Extraordinary holiness of life&mdash;of which proof remains not
only in the popular couplet at the head of this paper, and in the
appellation of St. Richard of Dundalk, by which he was known
for centuries, but in the stronger evidence of a Pontifical commission
issued by Boniface IX. to examine into his miracles with
a view to his canonization;&mdash;rare intellectual power exhibited in
every branch of theology&mdash;erudition both various and profound&mdash;eloquence
of a high order, to which his sermons still extant
bear testimony; all these are qualities which, especially when
exercised under the trying vicissitudes of a great controversy
within the Church, could not fail to constitute a remarkable
career. Of this career we now propose to lay before our readers
an outline as perfect as the materials within our reach will allow
us to sketch. We do so with the hope that others, in whom
better skill is backed by richer materials, may be led to supplement
from their store our slender contribution to the history of
an illustrious successor of St. Patrick.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ II. The Fitz-Ralph Family: Richard's Parentage.</head>

<p>
Ralph, founder of the Fitz-Ralph family, held forty-nine
lordships in England in the reign of William the Conqueror.
From this stem various branches issued, and several families of
Fitz-Ralphs were to be found in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
To which of these Richard belongs is a matter of uncertainty.
Prince, in his anxiety to enrol him among the worthies
of Devonshire, refers him to the Fitz-Ralphs of Widecomb
in the Moor, who, about the time of Edward I., changed their
names and residence, henceforth calling themselves Stillingford,
from their new abode near Exeter. But this is mere guess work.
It is far more probable, in our opinion, that he belonged to the
Derbyshire Fitz-Ralphs, of which family the Frechevilles and
Musards of Staveley<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica</hi>, vol. iv. London, 1847. Pedigree
of the Frechevilles and Musards.</note> became in after times the representatives.
Our reasons are these. Ralph (Musard) Baron Staveley, a direct
descendant of Ralph, the founder of the family, had a daughter
Margaret, who, on his death, became co-heir with her brother
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>
Nicholas and her sister Isabella. Margaret married an Irishman,
named in the pedigree Joannes de Hibernia, and died in the year
1308. Three children were born of this marriage&mdash;John de Hibernia,
Ralph, and Alicia. Thus, we actually have the heir of the
Fitz-Ralphs born of an Irish father. As his mother's heir John de
Hibernia was owner of the third part of the manor of Staveley,
and this property he gave and granted to Ralph de Frecheville,
The evidence taken at an inquisition held at Staveley, in
1316, asserts that the said John <q>had no other lands in England</q>.
This would lead us to conjecture that he had lands in Ireland,
and after this time the pedigree no longer adds the words <hi rend='italic'>de
Hibernia</hi> to any of the Fitz-Ralphs. Now, it is certain that
Richard must have been born about this time; and although the
precise year of his birth is not known, the date of his promotion
to Armagh would allow him to have been the son of this John,
or of his brother Ralph. But, setting conjecture aside, one thing
is proved beyond a doubt, viz., that about the time of Richard's
birth the Fitz-Ralphs of Staveley had a close connection with
Ireland.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ III. His Birthplace.</head>

<p>
An almost universal tradition fixes his birthplace at Dundalk.
According to Wadding, the tradition was, that his parents came to
Dundalk from the well known territory in the north of Ireland,
called <hi rend='italic'>Ruta</hi>, or the Route. Wood states that almost all writers&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auctores
pene omnes</foreign>&mdash;make him an Irishman. This tradition
is also clearly expressed in the appellation of Richard of Dundalk,
by which he was universally known. It was the custom of the
age to designate men by the name of their native place. Of
this we have an excellent example in the name of John Baconthorpius,
or of Baconthorpe, who, as we shall see, was Fitz-Ralph's
professor at Oxford. Cotton, in his <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, tells us that
<q>it has been contended, with some appearance of truth, that this
prelate was born in England</q>. He here alludes to the opinion
maintained by Rev. John Prince,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Danmonii Orientales Illustres, or the Worthies of Devon.</hi></note> who considers it probable that
our prelate was born in Devonshire, adding, <q>some tell us, that
he was an Irishman, and born in the town of Dundalk in that
kingdom, and hence called by the name of Richard of Dundalk.
Whereas, it is possible he might be so denominated, not from his
birth, but from his long residence, or his doing some eminent exploit
there, or from some other like occasion there. Others say he
was an Englishman, which is not improbable, for these reasons:
that he had his education at Oxford; that he was chosen commissary
of that university; that he was made archdeacon of Lichfield;
and that he was encouraged against the friars by English bishops</q>.
</p>

<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>

<p>
These are the only arguments alleged to prove that Archbishop
Fitz-Ralph was born in England. They are of no weight
whatever when compared with the mass of testimony on the
other side. 1.&mdash;The name of Richard of Dundalk could not
have arisen from the primate's long residence in that town,
for he resided in his diocese only for about nine years, and
certainly did not spend all his time in Dundalk. 2.&mdash;Nor
is it told in history that he performed any eminent exploit
here. 3.&mdash;It does not make against the Irish origin of Archbishop
Fitz-Ralph that he had his education at Oxford. It is
well known that at the beginning of the fourteenth century there
were very many Irishmen at Oxford. Bale gives the names of
several most distinguished Irishmen who flourished there at that
period&mdash;in 1310, Malachias Minorita; in 1320, David O'Buge
of Kildare; in 1330, Gilbert Urgalius, who, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consueto Hibernorum
hominum more</foreign>, went to Oxford after completing his rudimentary
studies. Besides, among the <emph>nations</emph> whose contests in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries so often made Oxford anything
but a quiet abode of learning, the Irish had their place and
generally went with the Southernmen. And the Archbishop
himself, in his discourse at Avignon, relates how he had sent to
Oxford four priests of the diocese of Armagh. 4.&mdash;That the
appointment of Richard as chancellor or vice-chancellor of
Oxford does not necessarily suppose him to have been an
Englishman, will appear from what we have to say farther on
concerning this office. 5&mdash;Nor was it strange that an Irish
ecclesiastic should hold benefices in England. Clement VI., in
1351, granted to John de Briane, Dean of St. Patrick's at
Dublin, who held at the same time the parish of Hatfield in
Lincoln, permission to retain his benefices during his five years'
course at a University.<note place='foot'>Theiner, <hi rend='italic'>Monumenta</hi>, p. 296-594.</note>
</p>

<p>
Summing up the evidence, we have, on the one hand, the
almost universal tradition that our prelate was born in Dundalk;
we have an established connexion between the Derbyshire Fitz-Ralphs
and Ireland about the time of his birth. On the other
hand, against his Irish origin, we have no argument stronger
than mere probabilities, which, when examined, are found to
have no substance. We conclude, therefore, that Richard Fitz-Ralph
was born in Dundalk. This conclusion receives some
confirmation from a narrative in Fox,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Martyrol. Angl.</hi>, tom. i. p. 296.</note> where we are told that a
copy of the entire Bible, translated into Irish by Archbishop
Fitz-Ralph, was found, many years after his death, in the walls of
his cathedral. Now, if this story be true, and it is indirectly
confirmed by Usher, it is plain that the Archbishop must have
been born in Ireland. It is hard to believe that nine years,
<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>
broken as they were by provincial visitations and other labours,
would have been sufficient to make an English prelate master of
a language so difficult as the Irish, and that to the degree of perfection
requisite for a translation of the sacred text.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ IV. His Studies And University Career.</head>

<p>
Richard Fitz-Ralph went to Oxford, and was entered of Balliol
College (then recently founded), where he remained until he had
taken his degree of Master of Arts. The statutes in force at that
time required him to leave Balliol. As soon as he received his
degree in Arts, he accordingly passed to what is now known
as University College, but which after 1332 was called <hi rend='italic'>Magna
Aula Universitatis</hi>, and which owed its origin to the liberality
of William de Durham, who dying in 1249, bequeathed
a sum of money for the benefit of ten or twelve poor masters.
By a decision of congregation in 1280, four masters,
<q>whoever might be considered fittest for promotion in Holy
Church</q>, were to be chosen to enjoy these funds, each master
being entitled to fifty shillings sterling yearly for his maintenance.
The same document enjoins that the abovementioned
masters, living together, shall attend lectures on theology, and
shall be able, at the same time, to hear lectures on the decrees
and decretals. As to their way of living and learning, they
shall behave as they are directed by some fit and experienced
men appointed by the Chancellor.<note place='foot'>Huber, <hi rend='italic'>English Universities</hi>, vol. i., p. 438, Newman's edition.</note>
</p>

<p>
His residence at Balliol gave him special opportunities to
become proficient in arts. The college had been endowed to
enable sixteen scholars to study in arts, each scholar receiving
a yearly revenue of twenty-seven marks. His residence in University
College enabled him to cultivate theology. Thus all the
materials of knowledge then existing were brought within his
reach. At that date the course of studies had changed a good
deal from the ancient narrow limits of the Trivium<note place='foot'>Grammar, logic, and rhetoric.</note> and Quadrivium.<note place='foot'>Arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music.</note>
Out of the logic of the Trivium the new philosophy
was developed, and the sciences of the Quadrivium became mere
preparatory studies to the Facultas Artium.<note place='foot'>Huber, <hi rend='italic'>English Universities</hi>, vol. i. p. 53.</note> It is mentioned by
Tanner and others, that Richard Fitz-Ralph attended the theological
lectures of the famous Carmelite John Baconthorpe. This
remarkable man was one of the most illustrious scholars of the
day, and exercised a powerful influence on the mind of his pupil.
It has been observed, that when the latter had become Archbishop
of Armagh, and had entered upon his controversy with
the friars, he ever showed a marked affection for the Carmelites.
</p>

<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>

<p>
The early half of the fourteenth century was a season of much
agitation in philosophical and theological opinions. The ancient
struggle between the Nominalists and the Realists entered at this
time upon a new phase. The Realism of St. Thomas of Aquin
was opposed by the Nominalism of Occam, and Fitz-Ralph found
Oxford still agitated by the controversies that master had excited.
The Franciscans were generally Nominalists; the secular clergy,
as a body, were Realists. The entire university was divided into
two opposite camps. The <q>Northern men</q> declared for Realism,
the <q>Southern men</q> for Nominalism.<note place='foot'>Huber, note xx. p. 408, vol. i.</note> Fitz-Ralph became a
leading Realist, and the marked divergence between his views
and those of the Franciscans was probably not without its influence
on the controversy to which hereafter we shall have
occasion to refer.
</p>

<p>
How deep and how extensive were the studies of Fitz-Ralph
shall best be learned from the list of his works at the conclusion
of this notice. It will be enough for our present purpose to state
here, that his labours cover almost the entire field of Catholic controversy
with the Greeks and Armenians, as well as (by anticipation)
with the Reformers. A remarkable element in his writings,
and one the presence of which reveals the form of scepticism
current in his age, is the contribution he has made to the
literature of the Christian Demonstration. He defends the
Christian religion against the Jews by contrasting the sacraments
and ceremonies of the New Law with those of the Jewish dispensation.
This line of defence was called for by the altered
method of attack which the Jews about the twelfth century
began to employ against the Church. In the early ages the
controversy turned upon the question whether our Lord was the
Messiah. In the middle ages they had recourse to the scriptural
defence of their own position, and calumnious attacks on
Christianity. It is not strange that he should have combated
Mahometanism. It should be borne in mind that the age of
Frederic II. had witnessed the birth of a strange admiration for
Mahometan literature; that Pope Gregory IX. had fought against
this novel danger; that against the Arabian Averroes and his
philosophy St. Thomas of Aquin himself had entered the lists.
It is not surprising therefore that the archbishop's zeal urged
him to provide a remedy for the evil by proving that the Saracenic
law itself confirmed the authority of the books of the Old
and New Testament.
</p>

<p>
Before 1333 he proceeded to his degree of Doctor of Theology.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>§ V. His Preferments In England.</head>

<p>
Ware<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Presulibus Hib.</hi>, pag. 20-21.</note> declares that Dr. Fitz-Ralph was made Chancellor of
<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>
Oxford University in 1333. On the other hand, Wood asserts
in his history that no record of this chancellorship exists either
in the University or the Episcopal archives. However, the same
Wood admits him to have been Commissarius of the university
in that year, or, as we may describe it, vice-chancellor. Is there
any way by which these different statements may be reconciled?
It appears to us that an attentive consideration of the various
phases through which the office of chancellor of Oxford has
passed will supply a very probable solution of the difficulty.
</p>

<p>
First of all, we must bear in mind that Oxford was not at that
time the seat of a bishop, but was included within the diocese
of Lincoln. Next, we should consider that even during the
course of the fourteenth century the chancellor was an episcopal
officer, not an academical one; he represented the ordinary of
the diocese, and from him drew all his jurisdiction and authority.
As the university grew in importance and extent, the position
of the chancellor, as a power extern to the university, became
untenable, and by degrees, the nomination to the office passed
from the hands of the bishop to those of the academicians.<note place='foot'>Huber, vol. i. page 132.</note>
For a time the bishop struggled to retain at least the right of
confirming the election, but in the course of the fourteenth century
even this claim was abandoned. The period 1300-1350
forms, therefore, a peculiar epoch in the history of the Oxford
chancellors, marking as it does the transition period between the
chancellors who were episcopal officers, and the chancellors
elected by and out of the university. Now this transition was
not effected suddenly, but almost by way of compromise: there
was no sharp separation between the two classes of chancellors;
the one gradually merged into the other. We should therefore expect
to find some confusion in the list of chancellors; the bishop's
chancellor being considered as the legitimate chancellor by
those who sided with the bishop, whereas the academicians
would naturally look up to their own nominee. Now it is quite
certain that Richard Fitz-Ralph, master of theology, was appointed
Chancellor of Lincoln on the 6th of July, 1333, for the appointment
is entered under that date on the register of Bishop Burghers.
We may conclude, therefore, either that as Chancellor of Lincoln
he was Chancellor of the University, as the episcopal officers
before him had been, or that his appointment having fallen upon
a time of some dispute about the nomination of the chancellor,
he was styled <hi rend='italic'>commissarius</hi> only, or that the story of his Oxford
chancellorship took its rise from the fact that he was chancellor of
the bishop in whose diocese Oxford was situated. According to
some authors, he was also Archdeacon of Chester. But he was
certainly Dean of Lichfield, at least from 1337, and held this
<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>
office until his appointment to Armagh. Wood relates that
shortly before his own time the first window on the northern
side of the choir of Lichfield cathedral contained a picture of
Richard Fitz-Ralph clothed in his sacerdotal vestments, and
above the following inscription: <hi rend='italic'>Richardus Radulphi filius,
Armachanus, Hujus Ecclesiae Decanus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>To Be Continued.</hi>)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Purgatory Of St. Patrick In Lough Derg.</head>

<p>
As at this season many pious Christians visit the Purgatory of
St. Patrick in Lough Derg, for the performance of penitential
works, we have been requested to supply, from authentic sources,
a history of that pilgrimage. In compliance with this request
we give the following account of it, extracted from Dr. Moran's
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Archbishops Of Dublin</hi>, where he treats of Dr.
Fleming.<note place='foot'>For this reason we have enlarged the present number by a half-sheet.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Edd.</hi>
I. E. R.</note> That Archbishop writing on the 20th of August,
1625, to the Internuncio in Brusselles, makes the following
statement:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The pious and innumerable pilgrimages of the faithful this year
are a pledge of great fervour; for, like bees to the beehive, so do they
daily flock in such numbers from every corner of the kingdom, for penitential
purposes, to a certain island, which is called the Purgatory
of St. Patrick, and which is situated in the centre of a lake, that
many have been obliged to return without satisfying their pious
desire, there being no room for landing on the island. This pilgrimage,
though, through the bitter persecutions of heresy, it has been
almost abandoned for many years, was once so celebrated throughout
the Christian world, that many from the most distant parts even of
the continent visited it in a spirit of devotion. The manner of performing
the pilgrimage as it is now observed from ancient tradition,
is as follows:&mdash;Each person, from the day he arrives in the island till
the tenth following day, never departs from it. All this time is,
without intermission, devoted to fasting, watching, and prayer. If
they wish to give rest to their body they must sleep on the bare
ground, and for the most part under the broad canopy of heaven.
They receive but one refection, and that consists of bread and water.
It is incredible what severe austerities and bodily mortifications
females, as well as men, and persons of every age and of every condition,
endure, whilst they perform this penitential course; and
during twenty-four hours they are shut up in certain caves, like unto
prisons, where they pass the whole day and night entirely absorbed
in prayer, and receiving nothing to eat or to drink.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have thought it well to mention this fact, for, I am sure, your
excellency will be rejoiced to see that the natives of this island, by this
so great and so unparalleled an impetus of devotion, seek to appease
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>
the anger of God; and we may confidently hope, that by their fervour
He will be appeased, who listens to the prayers of those who
have recourse to Him in their afflictions.</q>
</p>

<p>
The contemporary, Messingham, describes the course of penance
performed in the island somewhat more in detail than has been
already given in the letter of Dr. Fleming. <q>During the nine days
of the pilgrimage</q>, he says, <q>a rigorous fast was observed on oaten
bread and the water of the lake. The pilgrim was first conducted
barefooted to the church of St. Patrick, around which he moved on
his knees seven times inside, and seven times outside, repeating all
the while stated prayers of the Church. He was then conducted to
the seven places of station, known as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lecti pœnosi</foreign>, which were formerly
small churches, or sanctuaries, dedicated to various saints; and at
each of these he repeated the visit as above. The next station was
around a cross in the cemetery, and subsequently at another cross
that was fixed in a mound of stones. Thence he proceeded, <emph>over a
rough and rocky path</emph>, to a spot on the border of the lake, to which
tradition pointed as the place on which St. Patrick had knelt in
prayer. Here, also, certain prayers were appointed to be recited.
All this pilgrimage and prayer was repeated three times each day&mdash;morning,
noon, and evening&mdash;during the first seven days; on the
eighth day it was repeated six times; confession and communion
followed on the morning of the ninth day; and then the pilgrims
entered the cave, where twenty-four hours were devoted to fasting
and meditation. Any that choose not to enter the cave, passed these
twenty-four hours in solitude at one of the former stations</q>.<note place='foot'><q>Messingham, p. 95. See also Carve, who in his <hi rend='italic'>Lyra</hi> (edition of 1666), p.
112, gives a plate of the Insula Purgatorii S. Patricii; and adds:&mdash;<q>Certum est
magnam olim hac in peninsula apparuisse devotionem in qua etiam varios viri
sancti circulos seu cavernas maceriis introrsum circumdatas condiderunt; atque in
iisdem corpuscula sua jejuniis, orationibus, aliisque disciplinis assidue domantes,
auxiliumque divinae gratiae sine intermissione implorantes ac insuper Deum pro
communi ecclesiae bono, conservandaque inter omnes Christianos vera concordia
convenienter deprecantes</q>.</q></note> The
seven <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lecti pœnosi</foreign> were dedicated to SS. Patrick, Brigid, Columba,
Brendan, Molaisre, Catherine, and Dabeoc, who was the patron of
the place. During Catholic times there was an elegant church in the
centre of the cemetery, and, besides other relics, it possessed some
of our glorious apostle. This church, with the seven cells, or
smaller churches, was still standing at the time of Peter Lombard,
who adds, that <q>the English deputy did not dare to prevent the
pilgrimage or profane the place</q>.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Commentar.</hi>, p. 277.</q></note> He also describes the cave as
<q>situated a few paces to the north of the church, being a narrow
building, roofed with stone, which could contain twelve, or, at most,
fourteen persons, kneeling two and two.<note place='foot'><q>Rothe apud Messingham states, that only nine persons were usually admitted
into the cave.</q></note> There was one small window,
near which those were placed who were bound to read the
breviary</q>.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This solitary island was looked on as a place which had been
<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
chosen by saint Patrick for retreat and silent prayer, and for exercising
those deeds of penance for which his whole life was so remarkable.
Hence it derived its name of Purgatory, or place of Penance,
of St. Patrick.<note place='foot'><q>It is matter of dispute amongst our hagiologists, whether the St. Patrick, from
whose deeds of penance this island acquired its fame, was our apostle, or another
subsequent saint of the same name.</q></note> But whilst it was thus for the inhabitants of Ireland
a chosen retreat of prayer and penance, its fame on the continent
assumed another form. With the troubadours it became a
favourite theme. Calderon immortalized it in Spanish; in Italy, it
attracted the attention of Dante and Ariosto; and many popular
tales about St. Patrick's Purgatory are still extant in French and
Portuguese. It thus became a matter of romance; and poetical
imagination conducted the penitents who visited the Island of Lough
Derg, at first to the regions of Purgatory, and subsequently to the
abodes of the blessed or of the damned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the dawn of the so-called Reformation, Protestant writers
seized on these poetic tales as if they were matters of sober fact,
and availed themselves of the fictions of romance to cast ridicule
on the practices of Catholic piety and devotion. For some time,
indeed, they did not dare to offer violence to the pilgrims, who
hastened thither with unabated fervour. During the reign of
James I., however, the chapels or oratories on the island were
demolished; but this did not satisfy the fury with which the
enemies of the Catholic faith assailed its sanctuaries and shrines.
Enraged at the numbers who, despite their threats, continued to
flock to this penitential retreat, the lords justices, in 1632, made
a last effort to desecrate <q>the holy island</q>. After publicly announcing
that, in the opinion of the Papists, there was a passage
from this island to the other world, and an entrance to the
realms of Purgatory, they gave orders to have the whole island dug
up, and that especially no portion of the cave should remain undestroyed;
and thus, says Dr. Mant, was made known <q>the imposition
of the Irish clergy</q>. But we should much rather say, thus did the
predecessors of Dr. Mant reveal to the world the blindness of their
bigotry, and afford a new instance of the frenetical fury, by which
alone they were guided, in upturning the sanctuaries of Catholic devotion.
Borlase, in his reduction of Ireland,<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>The Reduction of Ireland to the Crown of England, with the Governors</hi>, etc.,
London, 1675, p. 207.</q></note> mentions this sacrilegious
act, and adds, that <q>St. Patrick's Purgatory was discovered
to be a mere illusion, a little cell hewn out of a rock, no confines
of Purgatory or Hell</q>.<note place='foot'><q>Had he taken the trouble to open the writings of Peter Lombard or Messingham,
he would have seen that the limits of the cell were well known, and that <emph>the
confines of Purgatory or Hell</emph> existed only in the distempered imaginations of the
persecutors themselves.</q></note> Boate, too, in his <hi rend='italic'>Natural History</hi> (p. 44),
gives some further particulars; as he states that it was on the 13th
of September, 1632, that the order of the lords justices was carried
into execution, and that the religious who had it in charge were
driven from the island, their monasteries being demolished, and the
<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>
cell itself broken open; <q>in which state</q>, he adds (writing in 1660),
<q>it hath lain ever since</q>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the Antistitis Icon, or Sketch of the Life of Dr. Kirwan, bishop
of Killala, written by John Lynch; the learned archdeacon of Tuam,
and first printed in 1669,<note place='foot'><q>This valuable work has been republished, accompanied with an elegant translation
and notes, by Rev. C. P. Meehan (Dublin, 1848).</q></note> we have a faithful description of the
penitential severities of this place of pilgrimage, and of the true
motives which impelled the fervent faithful to flock thither in such
numbers:&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>That he (Dr. Kirwan) might not be wanting in any species of
piety, he reverenced in his soul the custom of undertaking pilgrimages.
Nor was he satisfied with visiting such places in Connaught as were
consecrated by the sojourn of the saints, and, above all, the rugged
mountain called <hi rend='italic'>Cruagh Padrick</hi>, which he was wont to frequent, often
ascending its steep sides, a thousand paces in height, and there staying,
according to usage, on the very summit, which is covered with large
stones, and creeping on bended knees over the rough rock fragments,
which struck one with horror, not to speak of the danger of yawning
chasms and precipices; but often, too, did he go into Ulster, to the far-famed
<hi rend='italic'>Purgatory of St. Patrick</hi>, in which the pilgrims are wont to
abstain from meat for nine days, using no food, save a little bread, and
water from the lake. During one of the nine days, they are shut up
in the dismal darkness of a cavern, and, therein fasting, partake of
nothing save a little water, to moisten their throats when parched with
thirst. At noontide and evening, they go on bended knees over paths
beaten by the feet of saints, and strewn with sharp stones. In other
quarters, they walk barefooted over rugged ways, in the olden time
frequented by holy men, to satisfy for their transgressions. Sometimes
walking and sometimes on their knees, they advance to a considerable
distance into the sea. Thus do they spend the day, pouring
out their prayers to God, and listening to holy discourses; nor in this
sacred place is there to be seen or heard anything scurrilous or
ludicrous. When night comes on, they lie down, not to enjoy repose,
but to snatch a few moments' sleep; their beds are of straw, nor do
they use any pillow but their garments. Thrice each day did Francis,
with the other pilgrims, punctually perform these duties, and, in
addition, he diligently applied himself to hearing confessions and
preaching sermons</q>.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 61-63.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The nuncio Rinuccini, in the report of his nunciatura, made to
the Holy See on his return to home in 1649, mentions how anxiously
he had desired to snatch from the hands of the heretics the <hi rend='italic'>far-famed
Purgatory of St. Patrick</hi>; and he adds: <q>The devotions of this deep
cave are of great antiquity, though their first origin is uncertain. It
is agreed, that the saint chose that spot for his holy retreats; and
the visions<note place='foot'><q>The poetical descriptions of <q>the Purgatory</q> abound with fanciful visions.
We shall give a real one from a MSS. Relatio of the diocese of Waterford, made by
Dr. Patrick Comerford, on 16th Oct, 1632:&mdash;<q>In dioecesi Corcagiensi est quidam
Anglus qui (ut a multis fertur) biduum vel triduum mortuns revixit, et cum ante
obitum esset Calvinista, statim atque revixit abjuravit Calvinismum et publice
soepius declaravit se vidisse in inferno Lutherum et Calvinum et proinde neminem
salvari posse qui eorum dogmatibus adhaereret; hinc excitati Protestantes eum iu
carcerem detruserunt</q>.</q></note> with which he was there favoured by God, were well
<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>
known, and approved of by succeeding generations. At present, the
fury of the Calvinists has levelled everything with the ground, and
filled up the cave; and as thus they destroyed every vestige of the
spot, so do they seek to cancel every trace of its memory. It seemed
to me that my mission from Rome should embrace this, too, as one
of its special objects, and I would have been, in part, content, could
I have re-planted the cross on that island. But I was not blessed
with the fulfilment of this design</q>.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Nunziatura</hi>, p. 414.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Despite, however, all the efforts of the Puritans, it continued to
be a place of resort for pilgrims from every quarter of Ireland; so
much so, that in the second year of queen Anne, the parliament once
more enacted, <q>that, whereas the superstitions of popery are greatly
increased and upheld by the pretended sanctity of places, especially
of a place called St. Patrick's Purgatory in the county of Donegal,
and of wells to which pilgrimages are made by vast numbers, ...
be it enacted, that all such meetings be deemed riots and unlawful
assemblies, and all sheriffs, etc., are hereby required to be diligent in
executing the laws against all offenders</q>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the year 1714, Dr. Hugh M'Mahon, bishop of Clogher,<note place='foot'><q>He was appointed in 1707, bishop of Clogher, and, in 1715, was translated to
Armagh. The Collections on the Church History erroneously mark his appointment
to Clogher in 1708, and his translation to Armagh in 1709.</q></note> presented
to the Sacred Congregation a Relation of the diocese entrusted
to his care, and amongst other things, he details his own experience
of the place of penitential resort which we have been describing.
He had visited it disguised as a merchant from Dublin; for, even
then, a bishop incurred great risk were he publicly recognized; and
he describes in detail each particular of its penitential course. From
his description we may conclude, that some changes had been introduced
in its ritual since the time when Lombard and Messingham
penned their commentaries. We shall give the extract in full in a
note, as it has never before been published.<note place='foot'><q><q>In septentrionali plaga hujus dioecesis Clogherensis, situs est locus ille
celeberrimus vulgo dictus Purgatorium S. Patricii in parva insula circumdata
lacu, quo ab initio Junii usque ad finem Augusti confluunt ex omnibus regni
partibus etiam remotissimis quotannis omnis aetatis et conditionis milleni viri
et mulieres ibique conficiunt novenam semel in die solo pane avenaceo et aqua
victitantes, ac humi cubantes nudis pedibus semper, et non raro offendiculo cruentatis:
ter de die varias stationes visitant per asperum iter acutis stratum lapillis
cujus magna pars aquis ultra genua excedentibus obtegitur, donec nona die, pracmissa
generali confessione, omnibus vitae noxis expiatis, sacro pabulo refecti ante
diluculum ingrediuntur subterraneam foveam quae purgatorium dicitur, ibique
viginti quatuor horis continuis semper vigiles et orantes sine ullo cibi aut potus refrigerio
perseverant et recurrente eadem hora egressi sequenti die se ter immergunt
algidis aquis sicque perficitur peregrinatio cui otiosi fabularum fabricatores
malta commenta addiderunt de spectris ac visionibus quae nusquam comparent
nisi in vitiato cerebro comminiscentium; tribus mensibus, quibus durat haec peregrinatio
ab aurora ad meridiem celebrantur missae, excipiuntur confessiones,
fitque concio bis terve de die ad populum qui uberrimis lachrymis, gemitibus
aliisque poenitentiae signis cum clamore editis concionantem frequenter interrumpit;
tantaque misericors Dominus asperam hanc et plane austeram peregrinationem
interioris gratiae suavitate accumulat ut qui antea videbantur obdurati, vitiorum
sordibus immersi acerrimos compunctionis stimulos sentiant, nec contenti semel
aut iterum accedere ad insulam, reperi in dioecesi qui quatuordecim vicibus peregrinationem
perfecerunt. Non leve huic devotorum fervori addidit incrementum
a SS<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>mo</hi> D. N. Clemente visitantibus concessa indulgentia plenaria quae brevi expirabit
et renovatione opus habet. Non absimile prodigio censetur apud omnes
quod peregrinatio haec primo loco et nominatim lege parlamentaria sub gravissimus
poenis prohibita, nullam vel certe raram patiatur remoram a circumhabitantibus
et alias supra modum malignis Calvinistis Scotis. Et cum ipso
accederem sub nomine mercatoris Dublinensis (nam sub hujusmodi negotiatoris
aut artificis involucris latere necesse habent communiter Praelati et
non registrati sacerdotes), ministellus illius districtus satis humaniter me
excepit. Dum alibi per totem regnum ingruente persecutione cessant functiones
ecclesiasticae in hac insula quasi in alio orbe posita, liberum fit
et publicum exercitium quad divinae providentiae hunc locum speciali favore
protegenti gratum referunt et meritis S. Patricii. Cum ibi essem haereticus
Anglus fama loci et curiositate movente eo accessit qui exemplo poenitentium compunctus
haeresim abjuravit. Praeter caeteros ecclesiasticos eo accedentes strenuissimam
navant operam Patres Franciscani. Unum in haec peregrinatione deprehendi
usum, ne dicam abusum; nam nona die foveam ingressuri audiunt Missam, quae
semper est de Requiem, seu defunctorum applicata pro iisdem ingredientibus, quasi
jam mortuis mundo, et tradendis sepulturae; quad cum vellem abrogare saltem
diebus Dominicis et festivis praesertim majoribus, quibus dicenda est missa conformis
officio obtenditur immemorabilis possessio et consuetudo in contrarium, ut fort
traditio, ab ipso S. Patricio primitus instituta quod a viris doctis et timoratis constantissime
assertum me perplexum reddidit et propterea humillime rogo edoceri ad
Eminentiis Vestris quid desuper agendum censeant.</q></q></note></q>
</p>

<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>About forty years later, the Purgatory of St. Patrick was visited
by another eminent prelate of our Irish Church, Dr. Thomas De
Burgo, who, in his <hi rend='italic'>Hibernia Dominicana</hi>, has recorded his impressions
on visiting that far-famed sanctuary. <q>So great</q>, he says,
<q>are the penitential deeds performed there, that they exceed, in my
opinion, those of any other pilgrimage in the universe</q>;<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Hib. Dom.</hi>, p. 4, not. 6. The same learned writer justly remarks, that it was
from the severity of its penitential exercises that this island derived its name:&mdash;<q>Locus
iste luendis peccatorum poenis destinatus <emph>purgatorium</emph> dicitur, non quidem
posthumum, sed vitale seu viatorium in praesenti vita</q>.</q></note> and he adds:
<q>Non quae audivi, sed quae vidi refero; mihi enim feliciter contigit,
insulam ipsam sanctissimi Patritii habitatione et miraculis consecratam,
praeclarumque austeritatis primorum ecclesiae saeculorum praebentem
exemplar, invisere anno 1748</q>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As regards the relations of the Holy See with this place of devotion,
we learn from the Bollandists, that, in 1497, the cave was destroyed
by order from Rome, in consequence of its being represented
to the Pope as <emph>an occasion of shameful avarice</emph>, by a monk from Holland,
who had visited it, attracted by its wide-spread fame, and yet
saw there none of the wonderful visions which he had heard so often
described.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Bollandists</hi>, March 17, p. 590.</q></note> The Ulster Annals also commemorate this destruction,
but state that it was occasioned by its not being the true cave hallowed
by St. Patrick.<note place='foot'><q>From this, we might, perhaps, conclude, that the cave thus destroyed was not
the present sanctuary visited by pilgrims, but was situated on one of the other
islands of Lough Derg. In the Ordnance Map, the site of some such deserted cave
is marked on the adjoining island, known as Saints' Island.</q></note> The proper lessons for the feast of the Purgatory
<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>
of St. Patrick were inserted in the Roman Breviary, printed
at Venice in 1522, but were expunged by order of the Holy Father,
in the next edition, by the same printer, in 1524. The nature of the
devotion was subsequently explained to the Holy See; and we are informed
by Messingham, that indulgences were attached to its penitential
exercises before the close of the sixteenth century.<note place='foot'><q>Messingham, <hi rend='italic'>Florileg.</hi>, p. 125.</q></note> When
Dr. M'Mahon wrote his Relatio, the term of the indulgences granted
by pope Clement X. had just expired. A little later, the cardinal
archbishop of Benevento, who was subsequently raised to the papal
chair as Benedict XIII., made the Purgatory of St. Patrick the
theme of one of his homilies to his flock; and since that time this devotion
has been ever cherished and encouraged by the sovereign
pontiffs.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the Annals of the Four Masters, and other ancient records,
mention of pilgrimages to this island seldom recurs. It was a mere
matter of private devotion, and did not precisely fall within the province
of history. In the sixteenth century, we learn from the Bollandists,
that it was sometimes visited by 1,500 persons at the same
time.<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Boll.</hi>, March 17, p. 590.</q></note> Dr. Fleming tells us how such numbers flocked to it in 1625,
that many had to return without finding room to land upon the island.
Nor since then has its celebrity decreased; and we find that, before
the famine years of 1847, this sanctuary was annually visited by
no fewer than 10,000 pilgrims.<note place='foot'><q>See notes to <hi rend='italic'>Camb. Evers.</hi>, vol. i. p. 146.</q></note> At the present day the average
number of daily pilgrims, during the <emph>station months</emph>, is very considerable,
and the total annual number is estimated at several thousands.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Besides the many accounts of this Purgatory, published more as
matters of romance<note place='foot'><q>Amongst these we must reckon the narrative inserted in his <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Cath. Hib.</hi>
by O'Sullevan Beare, pp. 18-30. The Work on St. Patrick's Purgatory, published
by Mr. Wright (London, 1844), is a mere display of blind bigotry, by which he
seeks to identify the teaching of the Catholic Church with the romances about
this Purgatory of our saint.</q></note> than history, there are several valuable treatises
which deserve attention. Not only Lombard and Messingham, in the
works already alluded to, but the Bollandists (17 March); Dr. Lanigan
(vol. iv. p. 290, seqq.); Colgan, in his <hi rend='italic'>Trias Thaumaturga</hi>
(p. 27); and Feijoo, the celebrated Spanish critic, in his <hi rend='italic'>Theatro
Critico</hi> (tom. vii. p. 157), give several important facts, together with
many judicious remarks concerning this venerated sanctuary of Lough
Derg. The valuable notes of Dr. Matthew Kelly to the first volume
of <hi rend='italic'>Cambrensis Eversus</hi> (pp. 138-155), throw much light on the subject.
See also, a very rare treatise, entitled, <hi rend='italic'>A Brief History of St.
Patrick's Purgatory</hi>, written by the Rev. Cornelius Nary, parish priest
of Michan's, and published in Dublin in 1718.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgical Questions.</head>

<p>
We purpose in this number of the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi> to answer a few
practical questions connected with the office of the dead, which
have been forwarded to us:
</p>

<p>
1. Is it proper for the president of the choir to wear the alb
and cincture during the recitation of the office of the dead&mdash;the
matins and lauds?
</p>

<p>
2. Should he wear stole and cope, or either?
</p>

<p>
3. Is it correct to say the Requiem aeternam after the prayer
at lauds when the Mass follows?
</p>

<p>
4. is it proper for the priest who presides in the choir to perform
the absolution after Mass?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
1. It is not proper for the president of the choir to wear the alb
and cincture at matins and lauds. There is a decree of the
Sacred Congregation of Rites which appears to bear on this
subject.
</p>

<p>
The question proposed was:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Dubium LXI. Juxta Rituale, dum in officio dicuntur laudes:
sacerdos cum ministris paratur ad celebrandam missam solemnem
pro defuncto. Exinde autem oriuntur dubia de modo concludendi
laudes: nempe 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> Ubi sunt duo vel plures Presbyteri, alius debetne
concludere Laudes dum celebrans qui officium inchoavit paratur
in sacristia? 2. Ubi unicus est Presbyter debetne iste relinquere
officium Laudum sine Praeside et adire sacristiam ut paretur ad missam
et deinde opportuno tempore redire in Chorum, vel ante Altare,
alba, cingulo, et stola indutus ut concludat Laudes?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ad LXI. Affirmative ad primam partem. Quoad secundam
debet concludere laudes et postea sacristiam petere ut sese vestiat
pro Missae celebratione. Die 12 Augusti, 1864</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is evident from this decree that the vestments are not to be
worn at the office of the dead, for they are not allowed even
in a case which would appear one of necessity, viz.: when there
is only one priest present, and when some delay must necessarily
occur between the office and the mass, if the celebrant must
wait to say the prayer at the end of Lauds before he puts on the
vestments. If in such an extreme case, when there arises some
delay between the office and mass, which is most objectionable
and always to be avoided in ceremonies, the alb and cincture
cannot be worn, they cannot surely be used on ordinary occasions
when such necessity does not exist.
</p>

<p>
2. With regard to the second question, the Roman Ritual
does not prescribe even the use of a stole or of a cope, as far as
we are aware, and we think that the practice of not wearing one
or the other at the office is the most correct and to be recommended,
<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
though we are well aware that the contrary practice is
adopted by many. The Roman Ritual, treating of the procession
in which the remains are carried to the church, has the following
words:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Parochus indutus superpelliceo et stola nigra vel pluvali ejusdem
coloris, clerico praeferente crucem et alio aquam benedictam
ad domum defuncti una cum aliis procedit</q>.
</quote>

<p>
But these words do not apply to the office. The Caeremoniale
Episcoporum, treating of the ceremony on All Souls' Day, does
make mention of the stole and cope (book ii., chap. 10, n. 10):
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Haec ut dixi servantur si ipse episcopus sit in his vesperis aut
matutinis officium facturus; sin minus posset manere cum cappa in
choro in loco suo et Canonicus hebdomadarius paratus pluviali nigro
supra Rocchetum vel cottam aut saltem stola nigra faceret aut diceret
omnia praedicta</q>.
</quote>

<p>
The words of the <hi rend='italic'>Caeremoniale</hi> gave rise to the following
question proposed to the Sacred Congregation of Rites: <q rend='pre'>An in
officio defunctorum celebrans inducre debeat stolam vel saltem
possit, uti erui posse videtur ex Caeremoniali lib 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi>. cap. 10.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Resp.</hi> Negative extra casum in caeremoniali contemplatum.
7 Septembris, 1850</q>.
</p>

<p>
There is another decree of the Sacred Congregation of Rites
referring to this matter:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Dubium LVIII. An sacerdos qui juxta Rituale, superpelliceo et
stola indutus praefuit clationi corporis debeat retinere stolam dum
praeest matutino et Laudibus quae immediate sequuntur? Saltem
si in hac Functione utatur Pluviali, quum in eo casu non possit
deponere stolam quin per aliquantis Pluviale exuat?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ad LVIII. In utroque casu licere. Die 12 Augusti, 1864</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We may observe that a direct answer is not given to the
question, which was proposed with the view of ascertaining what
should be done in two special cases, and the only answer given
was <q>in utroque casu licere</q>. Hence a priest might wear the
stole and cope, but should he not do so, he would not follow
a course at variance with this decree. No doubt, in some
rubrical works, express mention is made of the stole and cope,
and still more frequently of one or the other; but the Roman
Ritual, as we said, does not prescribe either at the office of the
dead, and when their use is pointed out, it generally refers to
the cathedral churches, where the ceremonies are carried out
with greater pomp and solemnity, than in those rural churches to
which our correspondent refers. We may also observe that the
decree above quoted, does not contemplate the use of the stole
and cope apart from the procession. On the whole, considering
the circumstances of our churches, we would in practice
<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>
dispense with stole and cope at the office, while we would be
slow to condemn the use of the cope, if such a custom existed
in any church that in other respects carried out the ceremonies
of the Church with accuracy and decorum. But we consider
that the decree of 7th September, 1850, above quoted, clearly
lays down that the stole ought not to be used, though we find it
more frequently used on such occasions than the cope, on the
ground, perhaps, that it is an emblem of jurisdiction in the
person who presides.
</p>

<p>
3. In reply to the third question, we beg to say that the
Mass should commence immediately at the end of the lauds,
which terminate with the prayer, and after the prayer, the Requiem
aeternam, etc., and Requiescant in pace should not be
said: it is only when the ceremony concludes that these are to
be said.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>In fine Laudum dicta oratione, non adduntur versus Requiem
aeternam, nec Requiescant, sive sequatur Missa sive hac omissa statim
procedatur ad absolutionem, quia hi versus, qui deserviunt in ultimum
vale defunctis, sunt in fine precum reservandi</q>.<note place='foot'>Vide P. J. B. De Herdt, Sacrae Liturgiae Praxis, tom. 3, part 6, no. 32. A
very useful work, printed in Louvain in 1855.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The prayer at the end of Lauds on such occasions should be
said cum conclusione brevi. We give the following extracts
from Cavalieri, a distinguished rubricist, who writes, in tom.
3, cap. 2, decr. 16, n. 13:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In Rituali oratio ponitur <emph>cum conclusione brevi</emph>, sed hoc ideo, quia
supponit, quod non ibi terminetur officium, sed continenti filo pergatur
ad exequias: quare ut ponatur concordia Rituals inter et Breviarium,
quod longiorem notat conclusionem, concludendi orationes
haec erit regula; quoties una tantum dicitur oratio, et ibi terminatur
officium, conclusio sit integra; brevis vero quando sequantur exequiae,
seu absolutio ab tumulum, sive haec fiant praesente vel absente corpore
sive diebus 3. 7. 30., anniversario, vel alio officio quolibet. Confirmatur
ex Rubricis Breviarii Romani trium Ordinum S. Francisci, quae
approbatae fuerunt a Pio VI. an. 1785. In die Commemor. omnium
Fidelium Def. additur haec annotatio: <hi rend='italic'>Conclusiones (orationum in officio
pro defunct.) longiores adhibentur semper, quando unica dicitur oratio;
nisi statim sequatur Missa de Requiem, vel absolutio ad tumulum; tunc
enim dicitur conclusio brevis.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>(2) Cavalieri, <hi rend='italic'>ib. n.</hi> 14. quia Rituale, terminata oratione sub brevi
conclusione, non subdit versiculos <hi rend='italic'>Requiem aeternam</hi>, sed statim transit
ad Missam, et quatenus haec non sit dicenda, ad orationem <hi rend='italic'>Non intres</hi>,
nec dubitamus, quod praedicti versiculi taceri debeant, quoties post
Defunctorum officium sequitur Missa de requiem, aut absolutio ad
tumulum. Tunc enim ex hujusmodi officiis fit unum veluti continuatum,
unde versus illi, qui deserviunt ad dandum ultimum vale
Defunctis, sunt in fine precum reservandi. Huic doctrinae conformis
<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
est praescriptio Rubricarum in praedicto Breviario Fr. S. Francisci.
Loco cit. dicitur: <hi rend='italic'>Duo autem Versiculi (Requiem aeternam, et Requiescant)
post orationem omittuntur, si statim sequatur Missa de Requiem, vel
Absolutio ad tumulum</hi></q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With regard to the fourth question the Roman ritual is quite
clear. <q>Finita Missa sacerdos deposita casula seu planeta et
manipulo accipit pluviale nigri coloris</q>.... It is always
laid down that the celebrant of the Mass, unless the bishop be
present, performs this part of the ceremony. The <hi rend='italic'>Caeremoniale
Episcoporum</hi>, cap. 37, lib. 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi>, has the following words, which we
here quote:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Aliquo die non impedito infra octavam Defunctorum arbitrio
Episcopi, Canonicus aliquis, seu dignitas Ecclesiae Cathedralis celebrabit
Missam pro animabus omnium Episcoporum et Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Canonicorum defunctorum cum paramentis nigris et caeremoniis
prout supra dictum est, cui Missae Episcopus praesens erit cum
cappa et in fine si voluerit, poterit, immo debebit deposita cappa
et accepto pluviali absolvere, prout dicitur capite praecedenti.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quod si Episcopus hujusmodi Missae praesens non erit, vel absolvere
nequiverit, celebrans finita Missa, accedet ad cornu Epistolae
altaris, ubi in plano, deposita planeta et manipulo accipiet pluviale
nigrum et stans in dicto cornu Epistolae versus ad altare expectabit
finem responsorii</q>....
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is evident from all this what answer is to be given to the
fourth question, viz.: that in all cases the celebrant, and no other
priest, should give the absolution when the bishop is not present.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Notices Of Books.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Adjamenta Oratoris Sacri, seu, Divisiones, Sententiae, et Documenta
de iis Christianae vitae veritatibus et officiis, quae frequentius
e sacro pulpito proponenda sunt</hi>, collecta atque ordine
digesta opera Francisci Xaverii Schouppe, S.J. Brussels,
Goemare, pp. 543. 1865.
</p>

<p>
From the materials here collected and prepared by Father
Schouppe, the preacher may build his discourse with ease and
advantage. And yet, though the materials are placed ready
to his hand, the work will still be all his own. The author
does not undertake to supersede labour, but to lighten the
preacher's fatigue by lending his friendly help. He supplies
matter for the discourse, he even traces the outline of its form,
and then leaves to the preacher himself the task of construction.
In the opening pages he addresses himself to the question,
<hi rend='italic'>how is a priest, especially a young priest, to render himself
a useful and even a perfect preacher of the Word of God?</hi> In
<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>
answer to this question, he touches in a masterly way on these
two points, 1. What is a preacher of the Gospel, and what is the
perfection that belongs to him? 2. By what process may a
preacher attain to this perfection? Part of this process consists, of
course, in the preparation of the sermon, and it is to facilitate this
preparation that the work before us has been compiled. The
author reduces to fifty heads the entire cycle of subjects suited for
pastoral exhortation, embracing in this number whatever can serve
to bring the sinner to justification, to guide him in the path of a
Christian life, and to conduct him to Heaven. He gives on each
of these fifty subjects a treatise which is a marvel of brevity and
fulness. So judicious is the arrangement of the texts bearing
on the subject; so clear and full the statement of the case; so
simple the division of the arguments, that each of these little
treatises makes the reader complete master of the subject of
which it treats. On the more important subjects, and on those
which require more frequent handling, the author supplies many
and different divisions or outlines of sermons, thus guarding
against the monotony that arises when a subject is presented
often under the same form. One other merit we would signalise
in this work. It deals with the wants, defects, and vices of
the men of our own times. The books of sermons which are to
be found on the shelves of the clergy generally belong to an extinct
period; the exhortations they contain are coloured by circumstances
that have long ceased to exist. Modern modes of
thought, modern manners, modern literature, have given rise to a
peculiar class of temptations and of dangers, and as these differ
quite from those of a century ago, so also do they demand peculiar
treatment and special remedies.
</p>

<p>
Father Schouppe has not forgotten this, and takes care to
grapple with the difficulties that beset the Christian life of the
nineteenth century. Two indexes close the volume. One exhibits
a general synopsis of the contents; the other refers to the various
passages whence materials may be drawn for a sermon appropriate
to the gospel of each Sunday and holiday in the year.
Both indexes enhance the practical value of this excellent book,
which we do not hesitate to call a real boon for the clergy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland.</hi> By John P. Prendergast,
Esq. London: Longmans, 1865.
</p>

<p>
This is a valuable accession to Irish history. It gives an
account of the cruelties practised on our people in the Cromwellian
Confiscations. It confirms, from official sources, the
painful details contained in Dr. Moran's lately published sketch
of the persecutions of the Irish Catholics in the seventeenth
century. The Irish land question cannot be well understood
without the aid of Mr. Prendergast's excellent book.
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
